Lecture 1 - Course Introduction: Rome¡¯s Greatness and First Crises [August 31, 2011]

Chapter 1: Welcome [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: So welcome to History 210, The Early Middle Ages. I'm Paul Freedman. And behind this innocuous title "The Early Middle Ages"--I think we're going to have to jazz it up a little. I think we're going to put an exclamation mark on it, at least. But behind this innocuous title, you will see, I hope, if you stay for this course, a strange course. Strange, not because it covers the particular period 250 to 1000, but because it starts out very recognizable, and gets stranger and stranger, and seems to dissolve into a kind of a hard to grasp world. Hard to grasp, but fun. I will talk about both the strangeness and the fun aspects in more detail.

There are several great themes in this span of centuries: the fall of the Roman Empire; its survival in the East, as the Byzantine Empire; the so-called barbarian invasions and kingdoms, set up on the ruins of the Roman Empire; the triumph of Christianity, which went from being an outlawed minority religion to the established faith of the Roman Empire; and then survived the extinction of the Roman Empire.

We have two Teaching Fellows: Lauren Mancia, sitting at this end, and Agnieszka Rec, standing in that corner. So far, there are sections scheduled for Wednesday at 4 o'clock and Friday at 10:30. We'll probably have two other sections. We'll see how large the class is next week. Let me know if those two section times--well, probably, the sections to be added would be on Thursday: Thursday afternoon and Thursday evening. Let me know if you have some special problem in terms of the scheduling of the sections.

As I said, when some of you were already here, I'll have some pauses, so that if you are shopping and want to look at another course, it'll be, if not easy, at least possible for you to get up and leave. So I'll have several pauses during the presentation.

But, I should say, I do want to give a full class discussion today, or presentation today. We only have so many opportunities to discuss things. And I'd like to set the scene for you. And I think that will also help you decide about taking this course.

Now, this course is part of the Yale Open Courses Program. And, as you probably know, there are lots of--well, a select number, but a substantial number of courses that are offered free to the public via the Internet. And this is one of them for the fall. And I take this opportunity to greet our Internet students and Internet friends.

So since it's part of this project, a Yale University broadcast team will be recording all the classes. And they'll be as unobtrusive as possible. The classroom experience will be essentially as it would be if they're not there. And it's their intention to videotape me, and not you, so neither your faces nor voices are supposed to appear. Your questions are unlikely to be heard. I will repeat the questions, so that people watching this on the Internet will have an idea.

And I do encourage questions, both things that you haven't understood or things for elucidation. I have a slightly more formal lecture style than some people, perhaps. I try to have a reasonably structured lecture that doesn't wander off too much. Some of you have taken courses from me and know I have certain themes, or preoccupations, or diversions. But I'm going to try to be as coherent as possible, partly because we are filming.

So I hope that you're enthusiastic about the fact that we are participating in this Yale Open Courses initiative. And, having said that, now you should just think it away. The broadcast team is not very conspicuous. And the objective is for us to interact in the classroom as we normally would. And this is part of the unique experience of teaching and learning at Yale, so don't hesitate to ask me if you have any questions or concerns.

The syllabus, you all have copies of the syllabus, I believe. And, of course, you'll have seen it on the server. The books are at Yale Bookstore, and they are all there. I hope there will be enough copies; if not, we will get more. The first assignment is, conveniently in this sense, from the course pack. The course pack is at TYCO, the photocopy place on Elm Street. If you don't know where that is, let us know.

And the assignments for Monday and Wednesday, those first two assignments are from Peter Brown's The World of Late Antiquity and A. H. M. Jones' Constantine and the Conversion of Western Europe.

Questions so far? Right. OK. So the requirements that you see on the syllabus are a short paper that's due October the 10th. A mid-term that will be held in class October 17th. And a long paper, which is due December 5th. That long paper is a research paper. And we'll be glad to help you choose a topic, offer you suggestions, help you get started on that. It's 15 to 20 pages, and it counts for 40% of your grade. The mid-term counts 30% of the grade; the short paper 20%; and your section grade is 10%.

Now, this course does not have onerous requirements. But I expect you to do the requirements that we have. There's no final exam. I urge you to blot out of your mind the temptation not to do the reading because there's no final exam, or the reading of the second part of the course. And if we think that this is a problem, judging on the basis of how the sections go, we reserve the possibility of giving you quizzes in the section in the section [correction: second] half of the course.

Paper times, I'm going to be firm on this. I can't say absolutely no extensions on the paper, because I acknowledge the existence of overwhelming emergencies. But let me give you an example of an excuse that's not going to be accepted: "I have three other papers due that week." OK? Plan in advance. We are at your disposal. If you want to plan your final paper tomorrow, hey, this afternoon, talk to me. I'm eager to hear from you about that.

In the sections, we don't want you to bring laptops. And the reason for that is, not that we think you're going to be Facebooking or answering your email, because we know that you never do that. The laptops, in our experience, interfere with the purpose of the section, which is partly to talk to each other. And rather than focusing on the screen, and then, in a sense, being a series of archipelago of little islands, rather than a section, in the sense of give and take and interchange. If you think that that imposes some kind of hardship on you, I think you'll find that it is pleasant. And if there's some technical hardship, let me know.

So logistical questions? Questions about the organization in the course, or any other aspect of this? Good, that means that I'm clearer than on some occasions. So, if anybody wants to leave now, this is one opportunity. But, since it looks like I have your attention riveted, let me introduce the course in terms of its actual content.

Chapter 2: Introduction to the Themes of the Course [00:09:54]

We are beginning by looking at the crisis of the Roman Empire. And then we will be looking at its peculiar legacy. In the year 1000, where we stop, we will still be dealing with The Inheritance of the Roman Empire, the title of Chris Wickham's book, one of the books that we're going to be using a lot.

The legacy is peculiar because, while the memory of the Roman Empire remains intact throughout the period, and beyond--I mean, to this day, the head of the Catholic Church is in Rome. Until 1960, the transactions of the papacy were in Latin; the services of the Church were in Latin, the Catholic Church were in Latin. And Latin remains the official language of the Catholic church in its administrative head.

So the most faithful preserver of Rome and its legacy, historically, is the Catholic Church. And this is a paradox because the Church begins its career, and, indeed, its first 250 years, as illegal in the Roman empire. And, indeed, there are periodic persecutions where people were punished, including killed, because they were Christian.

The most faithful preserver of Rome, however, after the fifth century collapse of the Empire in the West, is the so-called Byzantine Empire--the Byzantine Empire with its headquarters in Constantinople. Despite the fact that it would abandon Latin for Greek in the sixth century and turn into a very different kind of political and cultural entity, the Byzantine Empire went down in flames to the Turks in 1453 still as the Roman Empire. That was its official name to the end.

Another heir to the Roman Empire, in a sense, is Islam, which begins in the seventh century, in the middle of our period. I don't have to emphasize to you the historical importance of Islam. But our task is to understand its origin and its astonishing expansion in terms of this era, 250 to 1000. To understand it in terms of its times, and thus how it arises and interacts with the Roman and Byzantine as well as, offstage, the Persian, Empires that it either destroys or weakens in the seventh and eighth centuries.

?

Mohammed was from outside the former empire, from Arabia, and may be said to represent a very different kind of set of ideas. But the power of Islam would, for centuries, be concentrated in areas of the former Roman Empire: the Mediterranean, the Balkans, Egypt, Syria, North Africa. Of course, in the latter, it still is the overwhelming majority religion.

And Islam then brings up a sort of question that I'm not going to deal with directly very much, but that will be at the back of our minds, and that is relevance. This is a pre-industrial course; it's in the very pre-industrial category in terms of requirements. It's far away; it's distant. That is part of its appeal, I think, is as I said, its strangeness.

But the lessons from the material covered in this course are perhaps these-- worth thinking about. How, perhaps the most successful, multi-cultural empire of Western history, how it did that, how it endured for so long. The success of the Roman Empire and why it finally failed. And in that failure, how does a rich, literate, well-developed society come to be destroyed by a more primitive one? Primitive, at least, in the sense of material culture, economic complexity, urbanization, and literacy.

Another important lesson is the power of religious ideas, not only intrinsically as part of people's lives and outlook, but socially and historically: how religion affects the political course of history.

Having said this, I think I did mention, I was going to tell you what was fun about this course. This is what I think is fun, and I've already kind of alluded to this. We begin with a familiar world, in the sense that the Roman Empire, although obviously not technologically the same as the one we live in, is a very advanced society and a very complex one. Advanced? Well, go to Europe and look around, and see the engineering feats of the Romans. See the public life that the baths, stadia, temples, law courts, marketplaces, whose ruins still, in many instances, dwarf the towns that survived around them. See what an accomplishment that is.

It is a huge empire, a bureaucratic empire, one with lots of literate people, a huge army, a huge civil service, a lot of commerce back and forth, all things that are familiar to us. But as it weakens and collapses, you get a kind of, if not post-apocalyptic, at least transformative experience. It gets stranger and stranger, more and more disorganized, harder to understand at first grasp. Basically we begin in the Shire, and we end up in more dangerous territories. It's hard to describe the territory that we end up in, but that is what I think is intriguing about the course. You start out in a familiar world, and it just becomes something alien, but, I think, appealing.

Appealing, but I do have one warning for you. Or one thing that I have seen students surprised at, and sometimes even annoyed at. And that is, we've got to talk about religion: both Christianity and Islam, and, to a more limited extent, Judaism, and also paganism, for that matter. But the one that tends to bother people actually is Christianity. So sometimes people will say, I thought I was taking a History course, and this turned into a Religious Studies course before my eyes. We're going to have to talk about some heresies. You're going to have to understand, actually, what people are fighting and killing each other over, when they talk about the nature of Christ, or the relationship among the three persons of the Trinity.

This is unfamiliar, but, again, I think unfamiliarity is good for us. And unfamiliarity has a funny way of turning into familiar. When I started teaching--well, dinosaurs weren't walking the earth, but they'd just departed, primitive birds and early mammals--the assumption was that religion was safely--religion as a political movement, not religion as a personal commitment, but religion as something that had an impact on politics was pretty safely gone, and that it was a feature of medieval history. Obviously the last years have shown us, in many ways, the power of religious ideas. The power of religious ideas, not solely personally, but collectively; not solely as sentiments, but as political movements.

Chapter 3: The Roman Empire before the Crisis of the Third Century [00:18:48]

So we begin with the crisis of the Empire, the first crisis of the Empire in the third century AD. If we go back just before that-- this isn't officially part of the course, this is like the chef offers you this little amuse-bouche, this little snack to begin the meal. The period of the Good Emperors, the second century AD-- the term the Good Emperor is a term popularized by the great historian of The Decline and Fall of The Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon, who wrote in the 18th century. And it's one of those works that, whatever its myriad factual and interpretive inaccuracies, still sets the program for how we look at the decadence and collapse of the Roman Empire.

Gibbon says, "If a man were called upon to fix the period in history of the world during which the condition of the human race was most happy and prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which elapsed from the accession of Nerva to the death of Marcus Aurelius," that is, 96 to 180 AD. He goes on, "Their united reigns are possibly the only period in which the happiness of a great people was the sole object of government." So it's this period of the so-called Good Emperors against which the subsequent decline traced in Gibbon's monumental work would take place.

Now, as opposed to Gibbon, we're not so confident that the Roman Empire was so wonderful for everybody involved. We have a somewhat more egalitarian outlook than Gibbon. Gibbon never says, oh, well, what about the slaves? Or what about the peasant, or hey, the position of the women in society? But more than that, I think we have some more doubt and hesitation as to whether any state, particularly any powerful state, necessarily represents a standard of virtue or happiness. For the poor, the smooth functioning of the Roman government was less important than it was for the propertied classes. Because the Roman state, like most states, in so far as it practiced the rule of law, was set up to guarantee property, not rights.

And you'll see Wickham, when we come to read him, he emphasizes, in the chapter on the burden of rule in the Roman Empire-- this is for September 19th-- the Roman Empire was not organized to reward ordinary people. To different degrees, and at varying times, it did rely on slave labor. This is easy to exaggerate. It's not a slave society. It's not an overwhelmingly slave-owning society, but certainly many of its enterprises involved slavery. Its laws were designed to protect the property of the wealthy, rather than to mete out equal justice.

Rome was an imperial power, and, as I will say in a moment, it was an extraordinarily tolerant one. But it was tolerant as long as you conformed to their image of civilization. Like many great imperial powers, it assumed that there were certain areas of life that were optional. They were very tolerant with regard to religion, for example. But their definition of civilization was being like us. They were generous about that. They would make citizens of people from the Celtic lands of Britain to Egypt. But this meant conforming to a certain set of standards, beliefs, assumptions, and a way of life.

Another thing that we now would dissent from Gibbon about is the efficiency of the Roman Empire. To Gibbon, in the 18th century, the Roman Empire appeared a marvel of efficiency. But really, how could it be efficient? The distances were so long, and travel was so slow. This is an empire that took weeks and weeks to traverse in the state of communications. And we know, from contemporary times that, even with great communications, indeed, with instantaneous communications, it's very hard to hold states together.

And, in fact, one of the things that's happened in the last 50 years is the weakening of the state, strangely enough. Strangely, because what people thought was going to happen is what had been going on in the 20th century generally. States had become more and more powerful, more and more dictatorial, more and more tyrannical. And, indeed, George Orwell's 1984, written in the post-war era in the late 1940s, assumes that totalitarianism is what's going to be generalized. In fact, it turns out that the problem is not so much the state-- look at the great states of the mid-20th century: one no longer exists, the Soviet Union, and the other, the United States--whatever our strengths are--it doesn't seem to be the extraordinary power of the central government, which is, in fact, much reduced from what is was in, say, 1950, by any measurement.

So we have a different idea of the state. We're more aware of the limitations of state power in past times. We're more aware of the discrepancy between the rhetoric of power-- and no polity equals the Roman Empire for its ceremonies of power, its architecture of power, its culture of power. But the emperor, in fact, however glorious, however much in the third century was worshiped as a god, his power was limited. His power was limited in terms of enforcement, if not in theory.

And this will be important because, right from the start, we're going to assess the accomplishments of the Emperor Diocletian, at the end of third century, and the Emperor Constantine, beginning of the fourth century, who may be said to have saved the empire from collapse. The thing about the Roman Empire that is indisputable, and does not have a value judgment attached to it, is that it was enduring. The Roman Empire lasted for an incredibly long time; it was stable.

In the year 410 the Visigoths sacked, plundered Rome. They entered the city of Rome, this so-called barbarian tribe, and they pillaged it. They pillaged it in a fairly orderly way, but, nevertheless, they pillaged it. This was the first time this had happened in the city of Rome in something on the order of 800 years. The Empire itself, by this time, was nearly 400 years old.

The other indisputable accomplishment of the Roman Empire is that it controlled the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean was its center, referred to often as Mare Nostrum, as ¡°Our Sea.¡± Our sea because they controlled all of the shoreline of the Mediterranean--the only power that has ever done that. There have been great empires: the Ottoman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Caliphate, but none of them controlled more than about 40% of the Mediterranean at any one time.

So even if we dissent from Gibbon's calm assurance that the best period of human history was the era of the Good Emperors in the second century AD, we shouldn't minimize the accomplishments of this empire and of this era. To live in security, with respect to both outside enemies and internal disorder, essentially peace and the rule of law, was unusual. And, unfortunately, it remains so.

Rome was an immense empire. It stretched from England to the Sahara, from Spain to Armenia. It had a common language of administration, Latin. And two cultural languages, Greek and Latin, understood by the elite from one end of the empire to the other. The cities were not walled until the third century.

Gibbon, in particular, emphasizes the tolerance of Rome, which appealed to his innate anti-clericalism. And, as many of you know, his explanation for the fall of the Empire was Christianity. It was Christianity that weakened the Empire, weakened its? elite, turns its attention to foolish controversies over Trinitarian or Christological concerns, when they should have been concentrating on the barbarians. This is not accepted anymore, for reasons that will become clearer in these first few weeks.

And its appeal though, the idea of toleration, is very important to Gibbon, writing in the 18th century, when Europe had just emerged from centuries of religious wars. Having seen the wars of the Reformation, well not literally, he hadn't lived through them, but being the inheritor of these religious wars, of the Thirty Years War in Germany in the 17th century, of religious controversy in Britain, Gibbon, like many members of the Enlightenment generation he was part of, thought that the world would be far better if religion remained either an exclusively private matter or just disappeared. So for him, the villain in history, and in particular, the villain in Roman history is religion.

But, however tolerant, of course, Rome drew the line at Christianity, for reasons we shall discuss. But it is still, historically, quite unusual that the Empire should have permitted all of these other religions. Indeed, rather than regarding, say, the religions of Egypt as inferior, they simply brought those gods in. Monday, you might worship Zeus. And Tuesday hey, if you wanted to see if Isis was going to help you with your impending business deal, why not go and see an Egyptian temple?

So its eclectic. It's a little bit like the way Americans dine out. It makes no sense to most people, in most of the world, to say something like, "Oh, I don't want Japanese food. I had that for lunch." If you're in Japan you're expected to have Japanese food for lunch and for dinner, and the same with Italian food. The same is true of religion, most people don't just say, "Oh, I don't want to go to Presbyterian Church this weekend, I'm going to go worship at a Buddhist temple, just for a change¡±. This is more in the nature of Roman religion. So this kind of tolerance is unusual. So tolerance, tolerance is a real virtue of the Empire, even if it's limited. Real virtue because it's unusual, historically.

Peace -- the Roman Empire spent half of its state budget on the army. On the other hand, no empire this large could be held together by military means alone. It was held together by an elite that shared notions of civilization, that made certain sacrifices for the public good. Those games, the circuses, the competitions, the ceremonies were usually paid for by private people, not by the state, for example.

It is an urban civilization, with an elite that is urban. The cities held their local gods. They had local administration. They built aqueducts, temples, law courts, all these edifices that I mentioned earlier. It was a cosmopolitan way of life. So it's diverse in the sense that there are many different peoples, but unified, in the sense that the elite shares a common language and even the city planning is the same. If you went to London or you went to Timgad, in what's now the Algerian desert, you'd know your way around. You'd know where to find the marketplace. You'd know that it was laid out in a grid. You'd know where the law courts would be in relation to the temples. You could find your way, just as if you get off the interstate, you know that there will be a Wendy's or a Denny's or a Shell station. And it would be an exceptional place that didn't have them. If you couldn't find a Home Depot, even without benefit of technical aids, getting off an exit of the average interstate highway then you don't live in America, or you haven't been here very long. So the same thing, there's a sort of a mental picture of what a city looks like, from one end of the empire to the other.

But it is an empire that is centered around the Mediterranean, and not just logistically or politically, but culturally. For the Romans, their empire included lands where olive trees didn't grow, and where wine grapes didn't flourish, but those places were not places they wanted to live. They wanted to control them, but they were beyond civilization. So a government official on the Danube, in what's now Hungary, writes home complaining that, quote, "The inhabitants lead the most miserable of lives for they cultivate no olives and they drink no wine," end of story. And you could imagine, there's a certain kind of East Coast discourse on the order of, "They have blueberry bagels out here, I can't live here. " Or, you know, the nearest Starbucks is 30 miles away, and there's no substitute. This is an impressive empire then.

Chapter 4: Flaws of the Roman Empire [00:34:09]

So, its flaws-- it has an imbalance between the urban and the rural, not as great as historians once thought, but it is dominated by cities that depend on peasants, but that tend to drain the land of its vitality. It's also imbalanced East-West. Strangely enough, for an empire that was founded in the West, by the time we start, the East is more prosperous. It¡¯s more urban. It has more trade. It's better organized, more commercial. Another flaw of this empire is its size. It works for a long time, and then, when it doesn't work, this becomes a real problem.

And then the army-- the army in the third century discovers that it can make and unmake emperors. So the immediate crisis of the third century, which lasts from 235 to the accession of Diocletian in 284, is that it has dozens and dozens of emperors. Most reign for less than three years. All but one die violently. So the two things are linked, the power of the army to proclaim an emperor, and the inability of that emperor to keep this power before the army or an army somewhere, in one province or another, rises up another emperor and kills the former one.

So it's a durable empire, but an unwieldy, and in certain respects, exhausted one.

So in the first part of the course, we're going to look at how this empire functioned. And we're going to look at its two great crises. The first of them, this third century crisis, which involves all these many different emperors, also has invasions from Persia, also has the first indications of barbarian invasions across the frontier of the Danube and the Rhine rivers, but it survives this first crisis. And that is the accomplishment of Diocletian, about whom you're going to be reading.

The second crisis, that of the fifth century, is similar, in many respects, but more final in its results. The fifth century crisis witnesses the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, the fall of the Roman Empire of Gibbon, that Gibbon made famous, and that continues to inspire a certain amount of fascination and fear today.

So here are some questions that should be in the back of your mind, at least, while you do this reading for the first few weeks. When we're talking about the collapse or weakening of the Roman empire, did this happen because of foreign threats or internal weakness? The rhetorical topos, and it's often invoked with regard to empires in the modern world, is internal weakness. That's because the opponents don't seem very savage or very impressive. But it's not necessarily a given. As I said before, external enemies, even that don't appear to be that imposing, can, under certain circumstances, impress their will on what would seem to be a more powerful empire. To some extent that is, indeed, because of internal weakness. But it won't do to exaggerate that. But this is one of the problems.

Another problem is continuity versus change. The East survives. The East even flourishes for a while. And even for a while seems to be on the verge of re-conquering the West from the barbarians. So how can we talk about the fall of the Roman Empire when, you know, only part of it falls?

Another question is, how did the rise of Christianity affect the political and cultural fortunes of the Empire? As I said, Gibbon said it affected its fortunes by destroying it. But beyond that, I think, over simple explanation, how did Christianity change the Empire? Was this change a catastrophe or a transformation? And, how did Christianity triumph? It seems to be so alien to everything Roman. How does it become the official religion of the Empire? And, how does it become, indeed, identified with the Empire?

All of these questions are currently very much debated by historians. I'm not going to have a definitive answer for you. I've certain opinions. I'll present the information basically in accord with that, but this is not something that has been scientifically proven or received universal acknowledgement.

So we begin this course with the reign of the Emperor Diocletian, 284 to 305. And we do this because he solved a number of problems which threatened the survival of the Empire in the third century. These problems, as I said, instability of rule, Persian invasion, barbarian invasions, and then, one I didn't mention, which is inflation, tremendous economic dislocation.

All of these are manifestations of the long-term flaws I just mentioned. The thing about long-term flaws-- I mean, you can point to long-term flaws in the Soviet Empire or long-term flaws in the British Empire. But why do they manifest themselves when they do? Or, to put it another way, why does the empire go on and flourish for a couple hundred years, or a few decades, and then collapse?

And I look forward to talking with you on Monday. Thanks.

Lecture 2 - The Crisis of the Third Century and the Diocletianic Reforms [September 5, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction and Logistics [00:00:00]

Professor Freedman: I always find Labor Day particularly annoying, because I have a job where I can set my own schedule, and I don¡¯t have a nine-to-five job. And most of my neighbors envy me because it looks like I don't have to work very hard. And I gave up a long time ago telling them that I did. But Labor Day, nobody else is working, and here we are. So points for us.

But the advantage of talking to you, even on an inconvenient day, is Diocletian. We don't use terms in the professional world of history like awesome very much. But the guy certainly deserves that. He rescued the Roman Empire, and we'll begin by saying what he rescued it from.

As a preliminary, the sections are meeting this week. If you're wait-listed for a section, just go to it. We will have enough sections for however many people take this course, right? So there are currently four. The additional ones that were added since last week are Wednesday at 2:30 and Thursday at 7:00. And again, if you're wait-listed, just go. We'll figure this out. There will be enough sections for everybody.

Chapter 2: Third Century Crisis and Barbarian Invasions [00:01:04]

So I referred last time to the third century crisis--a crisis of the Roman Empire that preceded the accession of Diocletian, from 235 to 284. And we mentioned several interrelated weaknesses of the Empire that might be seen as long-term causes of this crisis: the size of the Empire. It's sheer, massive size. The problem of succession. That is, it was never quite clear, and we'll talk about this in more detail, how one emperor succeeded another. The urban-rural imbalance. This was an empire built on cities. And to some extent, although heavily debated among historians to what extent, but to some extent, the cities may be said to have drained off the energy or been parasites to the productivity of the countryside.

It was an empire that was, according to one point of view, more cosmopolitan than it had been, according to another point of view, more barbarian. In other words, this was an empire whose Roman population was less dominant, partly through its own success in co-opting other peoples. Some of the peoples that it co-opted were not actually originally inhabitants of the Empire. Particularly, this is visible in the armies, which tended to be staffed by so-called barbarian tribes-- so called by the Romans, who referred to them as barbarians.

Another problem is the East-West imbalance, where the East tends to do better economically and demographically than the West--demographically meaning population. We live in a world where one of the great threats is over-population. It is therefore not self-evident, although true, that for most of the time, historically, most places have trouble reproducing their population. And indeed, we are starting to enter into a period of great demographic decline.

The infant mortality, the low life expectancy, the death of women in childbirth, the prevalence of disease, and to some extent, military threats of invasion, or if not threats, the reality, made it hard for one generation to produce children to replace itself. And this is true up until the dawn of modernity.

So these are fundamental problems of the Roman Empire. The real question is why do they explode in the third century? And this is a question, as I think I said last week, with any great empire. It's easy to point to the flaws in a complicated system. Often size is one of them. Often bureaucracy. Often overspending on the military. But some of these go on for a very long time, more or less successfully, despite the flaws. And the Roman Empire went on longer than most, as we said.

The immediate problems that explode in the third century are invasions and succession. Invasions by, first of all, Persia. Persia is the old enemy of the Roman Empire. Indeed, as many of you know, the old enemy of the Greek city-states that precede the Roman Empire as far back as the first historian of the Western tradition, Herodotus--first week of Directed Studies, for those of you who are nostalgic for that experience--Persia is the enemy.

Now we never study Persia. It's kind of like offstage all the time. And that's the great benefit of the Department of Near Eastern Languages and Cultures. If you want to learn about Persia really from within, instead of oh, my God, the Persians. And it's oh, my God, the Persians in 370 [correction: 470] BC, and it's going to come to an end. It is going to come to an end in the seventh century, but that's because of Islam - just to anticipate.

But in the third century, Persia becomes resurgent. Having been rather passive, it has this frontier with the Roman Empire in the East. More or less, buffer states are Mesopotamia, present-day Iraq, and Armenia. It's not exactly the same as the present-day state of Armenia, but more like eastern Turkey.

The dynasty that controls Persia and that is more aggressive than its predecessor are the Sassanids, and this appears in your reading. The Sassanid dynasty, the rulers of Persia, just more aggressive and more adventurous. Beginning in 224, they start to probe that frontier along the Armenian and Mesopotamian border, and eventually cross it and start to wreak havoc in some of the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire.

The climax of this is the Emperor Valerian was captured by the Persians in 260. Valerian actually one of the longer-reigning emperors of this chaotic period, 253 to 260. They kept him for a little while, displayed him in chains, maybe flayed him. Anyway, he died in captivity. They did a kind of a job on him. I think maybe he was flayed after he died, just not to be too gruesome, but I think they displayed the skin. As I said, I'm not a Persian specialist.

But the second invasion is across the Danube-Rhine frontier. The Danube and the Rhine form what the Romans thought of as a natural frontier with the barbarian states. That didn't mean that they didn't cross them. In fact, many of their great fortresses and establishments were on the eastern side of the Rhine. But they considered those as bulwarks against a Germanic invasion across the Rhine.

The Rhine and the Danube almost meet--the Rhine going from modern Netherlands down to Switzerland, and the Danube going also from Germany, eventually Austria, Hungary, into the Black Sea. As we'll see, Charlemagne, in the early ninth century, tried to build a canal between the two of them. And there are actually traces of this immense and completely unsuccessful project. And there now is a canal between them. So this is sort of the frontier of the Roman Empire, and this is the line above which wine grapes are grown [correction: wine grapes become scarce], no olive oil is pressed. And it's got to be protected, but not worth conquering.

So we have pressure on the Rhine-Danube frontiers in the third century, and another emperor, Decius, died fighting the Goths in 251--Decius and Valerian dies in 260. So the emperors are certainly out there as leaders, but that actually has to do with the fact that they're military guys. And that is part of the problem.

Chapter 3: The Problem of Succession? [00:09:39]

The major problem besides the invasions was succession. There were -- I mean, it depends on how you count-- is someone a real emperor, or is he merely a pretender?-- there are at least 30 emperors between 235 and 285. Many of them ruling for months; most of them being killed. They're assassinated by the Praetorian Guard, that is, by their own troops. They're killed in battle against foreign enemies, like Decius and Valerian. They're killed in battle against other people claiming to be emperors. But the most common thing is they're assassinated by their own troops.

How had Roman Emperors succeeded each other? There were several ways. One is what you would expect, and that is dynastic. But that's not all that common. Dynastic, in other words, families rule. And the family is recognized as a ruling family, and therefore it goes from father to son, or if there's no son, father to person daughter marries, or father to nephew, something like that. But that was not actually so common.

Sometimes the next emperor was chosen by his predecessor. This is characteristic of the second century AD, the era of the so-called Good Emperors. In theory, this is a great system. You have no family prejudice. You simply, as a good emperor, pick someone who looks to you like he's going to be a good emperor. So that is another possibility.

Another possibility is some guy is powerful and uses his troops to take over. And that's what we see in the third century. We see not only the militarization of the Empire, but the interference of the army in raising successors, in raising new emperors. The army was able to make and unmake emperors. Just as in some countries with unstable political structures, the military is able to make and unmake rulers.

What is interesting about the third century is that they're able to do it far from Rome. Some of these armies are in North Africa. Some of them are on the frontier fighting the Persians. Rome is becoming less and less relevant as the dominant city of the Empire. And I mentioned that now, because we'll see on Wednesday the result of this is will be the establishment of another capital, a second capital in the East, in what would be called Constantinople, modern Istanbul. Rome is fortified for the first time. There is a wall that you can still see in many parts of Rome built by the Emperor Aurelian in 271. And this is a significant thing, because until 271 for centuries, Rome had not been walled, because it was not threatened. And fortification in 271 starts to indicate things to come, or at least things that we know are to come. Namely, barbarian invasions, just as the marginalization of Rome begins at this time.

Rome in the third century is ruled, if one can call it that, by a succession of generals. Not members of an upper class elite, but men who have come from the provinces. Men who are not particularly well-educated, who would have trouble recognizing a tag from Horace--there being no Internet just to look these quotes up. They hold the traditional Roman elite in contempt. The Senate of Rome is the embodiment of that elite. The Roman Senate is a collection of extremely wealthy people from good families, extensive property, and very, very fine education.

The people leading in the third century now are generals raised by their troops. One of the reasons that the troops both raised up generals and then killed them, was that they tended to get a kind of reward from the new emperor-- a thing called a donative. A donative is money that you get when there's a new emperor. A bad idea from the point of view of the emperors, because it encourages double-dipping or triple-dipping. OK, now we've gotten our money from this guy, let's kill him and get money from another guy. I don't think that's too cynical to say that that is some of what is going on.

Now of all the crises of the third century, this is the one that leaves the most visible impression. There's absolutely no doubt that there are all of these different emperors, and that the top of the government is unstable. The question is how much does that carry over into the lives of ordinary people? One measure of the effectiveness of a civilization is that is survives, and even people don't comment very much on political instability.

In a way, we are testing that now. For many people, the fact that the government is polarized doesn't really matter, in terms of their everyday life. How long can that go on? That's partly because all sorts of institutions are functioning perfectly fine. Here we are. We are meeting. There's no problem of the supply of water suddenly, or scarce provisioning, or barbarians massed outside, and we have to sort of protect against during our class. It hasn't come to that. Yet.

But if you look at the lives of ordinary people in the third century, they are not saying, ¡°Not another emperor, I can't take it anymore.¡± The philosopher Plotinus, for example, one of the great intellectual figures of this time. Now it's true, he has a very otherworldly way of thinking about things. He is a follower of Plato, he's the leading so-called neo-Platonist philosopher, flourishes during the third century, travels a bit. But we never hear of any difficulty, any kind of problems raised by these unstable conditions.

Chapter 4: The Problem of Inflation [00:17:05]

The one that might have affected more people than the instability is inflation. Roman coinage was silver and bronze, and based on ratios of these metals to gold. The ultimate standard of value was gold, but bronze and silver had attributed values in relation to gold.

The need to reward the army with those donatives, and the dislocations of the invasions led to tremendous government expenditures. And this was a society that did not have debt financing. There are no bonds. There are no ways of the government anticipating future revenues and borrowing money against them. That is actually an invention of the Middle Ages. This is an example of something that the Romans didn't have that medieval cities in Italy pioneered, debt financing. I don't have to tell you what that is. And it's a great advantage, up to a point. Great advantage, because it gives you leverage, allows you to do things now.

So how does a government deal with problems like this if it can't borrow money? It does what is called debasing the coinage. To debase, that is degrade, the coinage means that you just don't put in as much silver or bronze, let alone gold, and try to get people to accept it for its value anyway.

So up until the 1970s, the American currency was based on gold, and dollar bills were called silver certificates. They said that you could hand this bill in for a dollar's worth of silver. It was, technically speaking, not currency. It was merely a representative of currency, which you could trade in. And before that, of course, the coins were metal. Dollars were both silver and paper, with the silver one being, in some sense, the more real.

It is in the nature of modern government financing that, at some point, the government could just say forget about it. And even long before the 1970s, of course the government didn't have enough silver for everyone to trade them in, just as it doesn't have enough gold in Fort Knox to float the entire world's currency. It has a lot. And that's important that there be some real kind of value, or bullion, or bottom line kind of gold bars. But the fact that it's not enough is not intrinsically a problem.

But here, so let's say the government receives, in the form of taxes and stuff, a thousand gold units. And it issues two thousand units using that gold. The coins say they're worth a unit, but they're actually, in terms of precious metal value, worth a half. So it pays its expenses that way. It pays the army. It gets people to accept this money. But when most people go to buy stuff, they are going to find that the stuff is 50% more expensive because their coins are not actually very good.

The governments tend to do this gradually, hoping the people don't notice in the first place, or that if the inflation is say, 10%, it's not so bad. But once having embarked on the debasement of the coinage, this tends to get out of control because of the famous Gresham's law--an 18th century economist--that bad money drives out good. If I have good sesterces, or Roman currency, with the full measure of silver that they say they have--one full unit--and I've got other coins that say one full unit, but only have half, I'm going to try to get rid of the bad ones and hoard the good ones. And only spend the good ones if I absolutely have to, or demand a premium on them.

So therefore, there are all these crappy coins circulating like mad, and the good ones retreat into peoples' wealth--they don't really have mattresses then--but into their store boxes or under their beds, creating in itself more and more inflation.

So you have a fierce inflation. Prices go up. People don't know the value of things. They start bartering. And the Roman economy is very, very adversely affected, as hyperinflation tends to.

Chapter 5: The Ruin of The Local Elite [00:22:17]

And a final problem is the ruin of the local elite, partly because of this economic chaos, but partly from deeper causes. The importance of this is something that I alluded to last time, and that is that the Empire could not be held together, really, by the government, however big the government was. It required the cooperation of wealthy people with ties to their native city. It was these people who sponsored games, civic improvements, maintained the temples, and kept a kind of local order.

The third century crisis undermines this elite. This elite is undermined by the militarization of society. They are, to some extent, ruined by taxation and increased taxation. They're just powerful enough to be well-off, but not powerful enough to evade taxation.

But they also tend to be undermined by an Empire that's more cosmopolitan, where local elites don't matter as much. Where, for example, military people who move around a lot are more important. And I emphasize this, not only because of these elites themselves and their role in holding the Empire together, but we're going to talk about this when we talk about Christianity. Because when the local elites are ruined, so is local religion. And local religion means polytheism.

If I am of a grand family of, let's say, the city of Sardis in Asia Minor, in modern Turkey, and I feel that my ancestors have always been involved in the worship of the goddess Cybele and I am a votary, or an officer, or like a member of the governing board of the club or society that runs the cult of Cybele, I'm going to feel very loyal to that local deity.

But if I come from North Africa, and I'm in Sardis because that's where my army is, I'm not going to don't care about some local. No more than you might care about a club that's important at Yale, if you went to the University of Illinois. No more important than you might feel about pizza in New Haven, if you came from somewhere else and didn't like pizza. It's just like this local cult, and you don't understand it, and you don't care. So the kind of things you will care about, we'll see, religiously. But they will tend to be religions that cross borders, like Christianity. Religions that are not identified with one place and one god, in the sense of local god, local temple, my people.

Chapter 6: Diocletian and his Reforms [00:25:37]

So into this mess Diocletian-- because Diocletian defeats his predecessor, Carinus in battle in 284. Diocletian is a general. In 284, it would have seemed like more of the same. But Diocletian rules until 305, and he abdicates. He passes the power to someone else. He is, however, very typical of the military class of the Empire. He came from nowhere, socially. He was the son of an ex-slave from Dalmatia, modern coastal Croatia. You can still see his palace in the Croatian city of Split on the Adriatic. His retirement palace, actually.

Under his severe guidance, the Empire was reformed. And the way it was reformed was that it was, in effect, militarized. Diocletian was not a great general, but he was a brilliant manager. And he was a brilliant bureaucratic organizer. I used the term bureaucracy, not to mean inefficient, useless administration, but administration. Administration officers of the state, who are capable of doing their jobs, or maybe not capable of doing their jobs. But who are nevertheless-- I'm not making a value judgment with the term bureaucracy-- I simply mean the proliferation of government and government offices.

Diocletian is responsible for the militarization of society. That is, building society around the army in order to protect it. And he is responsible for a more efficient, and ultimately, burdensome form of taxation. The two are linked because, as we know, you have to pay to have a large and effective military.

Diocletian did not set out to be a revolutionary. His aims were conservative. He wanted to save, preserve, restore, the Roman Empire of the pre-235 era. His methods were radical. He was willing to undertake radical measures. And the debate among historians, now somewhat muted. Many historians at one time felt that he had basically destroyed the Empire. By making it so bureaucratic, so militarized, so heavy-handed, in terms of government, it no longer was the Roman Empire. It was something else.

Now the reason this is no longer exactly considered to be a big problem or a big controversy, you'll see when we come to read Wickham. The Empire has an impress on society. There is what he calls ¡°the burden of empire¡±, but it is, at the same time, not a totalitarian empire that controls everything. Society has an identity that's different from the government.

So he has three goals. One, solving this problem of the imperial succession. Two, stabilizing the economy. Three, protecting the frontiers. Of these three, he's actually only really successful in the third--protecting the frontiers.

He devises a system, that we're going to talk about in a moment, of succession, but it does not really outlast him very long. The economy does get fixed, but not exactly because of his policies.

What he's really successful at and what changes most dramatically is what rulership means. That includes the figure of the emperor, who becomes more sacred and more powerful in terms of imagery as well as administration; changes in the administration, of taxes in particular; and then that goal of his to change and grow the military.

The size of the army grew, probably doubled. Maybe, just as a ballpark figure, from 200,000 troops to 400,000 troops. This is a major, major increase that had to be paid for. And it had to be paid for by taxation and from a population not particularly eager to volunteer to pay more.

Ultimately, it looks as if Diocletian didn't so much increase taxation as increase the efficiency of its collection. In order to increase the efficiency of his collection, he had to increase the bureaucracy charged with monitoring the taxes. And that means first making an inventory of taxable resources.

There is no income tax in this society because it's an economy based more on land than on salaries. An income tax is easy because you can keep records of what people are earning. The government, to this day, finds it much easier to take a portion of your wages because it knows from your company what you're being paid. If you're being paid in some other form, like you're a waiter, and a lot of your money is in tips, that's harder for the government.

If your wealth is in property, it's hard to put a value on that. You own estates. You have people who are free tenants, who rent land from you and pay you in money, or produce, or labor. You have some slaves. You have a water mill. How do you pay taxes on all of this stuff? The opportunities for evasion are greater.

So the first bureaucratic task was just to have a lot of people who could value things, who could come into a territory and say OK, this farm is worth so much, and it has these many people. They develop a system to evaluate productive units of things like land and population, and to tax them according to a formula.

So I have a lot of land, but it's not very good land. I don't have a lot of people making a living off it. I will be taxed at a lower rate than someone was maybe half that land but twice the people, better soil, more clearance of forest, whatever the reason. It changes. So every 15 years, the government changes its estimation.

A second means, once you have this taxation system in place, of bringing the Empire together and dominating it more, is to have the army really have first call on the resources of the state. We now start to have a state supply system for the army alone. This allows the state to avoid dealing with that debased currency. So for example, the state just goes in and takes wheat and gives it to the army, without taking money, buying wheat, giving that to the army.

Diocletian binds the Empire together, also very effectively, by a postal system. Post in this case meaning a system of riders, horses, communications, that allows the emperor to go faster than anyone else, to have news quicker than anyone else, to send orders quicker than anyone else.

And also, more punishment for things like tax evasion. It's not just that people get killed for not paying their taxes, or imprisoned, or tortured, but that groups are responsible. Not only that if I don't pay my taxes, I get punished, but if you and I live in the same village, and you don't pay your taxes, I get punished. Or at the very least, taxed for the part that you evaded.

But the most important change in government is the establishment of what's called the Tetrarchy. The Tetrarchy is the rule of four--four rulers. Diocletian divides the Empire, first in two: East, West. A very significant move that will have consequences for the next 1,200 years. He then appoints a co-emperor to rule in the West, while he rules in the East. And they each appoint a helper, number three and number four. The two emperors are called Augusti, emperors, and the two helpers are Caesars. So they're subordinate to their respective Augusti, and they're supposed to help them. Why this system? This is really to overcome the problems of size, communication, administration. It's a statement that the Empire is too big for one man to rule.

But the chief emperors are also exalted now. There's no longer a pretense that they're just first citizens or princes. They are clothed in purple. They don't move a lot in public audiences. We're familiar with this kind of dichotomy between the political figure as distant authority versus the political figure at least pretending to be just like you and me. We're in the era of the latter.

The Diocletianic period ushers in a period when the emperor is distant, glimpsed, product of ceremonies, wearing a lot of very funny-looking, but fancy clothes. He doesn't appear a lot in public. He's a god. You don't go up to him and shake hands or say hi. You throw yourself at his feet, and don't look at him until he tells you to. So the Tetrarchy, great idea, it really doesn't work. Because, first of all, the emperors don't necessarily cooperate. The Caesars don't necessarily cooperate with the emperors. And so in 285, Diocletian nominates a Caesar and then makes him, in 286, a co-Augustus. And this man is named Maximian.

In 293, Diocletian and Maximian appoint two Caesars. I think I'm not going to burden you with the personnel. I will hand out something on Wednesday that gives you some of this information. Diocletian and Maximian appoint Galerius in the East and Constantius in the Western--you don't have to remember who these are--and each of them marries a daughter of their respective Augusti. This looks like a great system. In 305, Diocletian and Maximian abdicate, and then these two people become Augusti. The two Caesars rise up to be Augusti, and they appoint their own new Caesars.

It breaks down beginning in 306. One of the sons of one of these Augusti is not appointed, and he's mad, and he revolts. And then the Augusti don't get along. Out of this chaos between 306 and 312 emerges one emperor. And that is Constantine. And we'll be talking about Constantine on Wednesday. So the Tetrarchy fails.

Diocletian's second big initiative was over this question of the economy, and ways of combating inflation. Diocletian issued a so-called Edict on Prices. The Edict on Prices attempted to set a fixed price for goods. And if you sold them for more than that, you were to be severely punished. This is the kind of classic example of the state trying to combat inflation by dictating prices.

Most of you are not familiar with inflation because we have lived in an era of very low interest and fairly stable prices. But if you think of those commodities whose inflation you are familiar with, like petroleum, it is very dislocating. It starts to create panics, and the panics then feed into the inflation. Just as, if people keep on getting gas because they think that it's going to go up in price, then there's a greater demand for gasoline, and it goes up further in price. Eventually, if the thing is really just speculative, it deflates again. And that's what's happened with products that we're familiar with in recent times.

But there is also a kind of structural, longer-term inflation such as America experienced, for example, in the '70s. And in theory, if you have resource crises and things that are becoming scarcer, then you ought to have more and more experience with inflation. The government in the 1970s in the United States tried also to have an Edict on Prices. Under President Ford, there was a kind of administration of maximum prices. The problem with this is that it creates a temptation for black markets, creates a version of what we were just talking about with Gresham's law of coinage.

If you say that tomatoes can only be sold for a dollar a pound, then those tomatoes that are being sold for a dollar a pound in a climate of severe inflation will be terrible, will be rotten. If you want to pay $2.00 a pound in secret, we have some nice tomatoes for you. And if you want to pay $5.00 a pound, we have some really nice, locally-grown tomatoes for you. All of which may be illegal, but the legal market is empty. And this is what happened in response to the Edict of Prices.

This doesn't mean that the government cannot--I mean it still remains debatable, obviously, the degree to which government can or cannot intervene in such things--but certainly, in the case of the Roman Empire, this failed. What did bring back a measure of economic stability is the reform of the taxation--the fact that the state simply started getting in more resources, that less was being withheld by private people, and so the state could actually pay for its administrative and military costs.

So Diocletian succeeded in abdicating peacefully, spent his retirement in Split in his palace, and lived to see the breakdown, or the partial breakdown of the Tetrarchy. And in certain respects, his policies clearly failed. The Edict on Prices had to be abandoned; the Tetrarchy did not work; and Diocletian failed in trying to suppress Christianity. We'll talk about this some more, but Diocletian, in the late part of his reign--a couple animals were split open to see what the future would be. Right? Isn't that what we all do if you want to figure out what's going to happen? You slaughter an animal and check out its liver. Maybe its kidneys and spleen, too. But the liver is really what you want to look at.

And I don't exactly know what the animal was, what the organs were, and why they didn't splay out right, but the liver told Diocletian that the Christians were responsible for this, and that he'd better go after them. So there is this big persecution of Christians in the first part of the fourth century. And he certainly didn't succeed in that. Not only did the Christians not crumble, but, of course, Diocletian's most effective successor, six years after he abdicated, would convert to Christianity.

But Diocletian is extremely important, and in many respects, extremely successful. He did more than prop up a tottering empire. He did more than just transform a tottering empire into a kind of tottering tyranny. He saved the Roman Empire. He saved the Roman Empire for 100 years. When you take a course like this that goes for 700, 800 years, you start to hurl centuries around and get confused among them. But any polity that exists for 100 years is fairly impressive. Or a polity that looks like it's about to collapse, and then is restored for 100 years.

The Roman Empire, conventionally speaking, is thought to have collapsed in the West in the late fifth century. In the East, however, arguably, Diocletian's reforms last for more on the order of 1,200 years. The Eastern Empire, the Byzantine Empire would fall in 1453. And to its last day, it was modeled on Diocletianic administrative and military forms.

People at the time clearly thought that they'd been saved from disaster. If you look at fourth century artifacts, things like mosaics on the floors of dining rooms, people often put mottos there. And their mottos are things like "Joyful times everywhere." or "A world restored." The fourth century is interpretable as an era of increasing gloom, because we know that in the fifth century things are going to collapse.

But people in the fourth century are not saying to each other, "I'm so glad I'm alive in the fourth century, because I don't want to see what's going to happen in the fifth." They are just happy that the barbarians are back across the Danube and the Rhine; the Persians are more or less controlled along the frontier. Yes, taxes are high. Yes, the elite is some sort of riff-raff, and not as well educated, and they're military people. But basically, things are working; prosperity is restored to the people who had been prosperous before; the local elites have declined, but it's not so visible as it had been.

But there are some changes. Changes that we can, with the proverbial benefit of hindsight, see. Changes in the center of gravity. The dominant places are now places that are military bases. They are great cities with all the amenities of Rome--that is, stadiums, gateways. One of the best-preserved of these to this day is Trier in Germany. Trier, on the Moselle behind [correction: west of] the Rhine, has a wonderful collection of Roman ruins. A gateway, the Porta Nigra, a theater, a sports arena, a basilica, a law court turned into a church. The reason Trier was great was because of the frontier. It was one of the most important cities in the Empire because of the military, because of its strategic importance.

And there are other cities that are like this. Milan, for example, becomes more important than Rome, because Milan is further north.? It's a good place to get to the Danube and to the Rhine quickly, whereas Rome is buried in the Mediterranean.

So we're in a new world. We'll discuss more of the new world on Wednesday. And we will see that Constantine, in some cases, completely revolutionizes things. And in other cases, continues Diocletian's work.

Lecture 3 - Constantine and the Early Church [September 7, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Today, we're going to talk about what is arguably the most important event of the first part of our course, the conversion of Constantine, the Roman emperor, to Christianity. Important not because of Constantine's own particular opinions. The fact that he embraced Christianity is, as we'll see, a little hard to explain on purely strategic grounds.

But its importance is that it represents a permanent change. It represents the beginning of the Christianization of the Roman Empire, a very unexpected result. Because not only had Christianity been illegal in the prior history of the empire, that is to say, for over 250 years, but of course, the god-man Jesus had been put to death by the forces of the Roman Empire. And as we've discussed, Roman religion, with its emphasis on what we've called "civic polytheism," or the performance of ceremonies in public, ceremonies that have to do with local patriotism, emperor worship, the tradition of the Olympian gods, and, above all, polytheism, was very foreign to Christianity.

The Christian religion thus seemed to be a kind of annoying epiphenomenon of Roman society when, in fact, with this event, Constantine's conversion, it becomes first a tolerated religion, then a favored religion, and very quickly, within the course of the fourth century AD, the official and almost the only religion of the Roman Empire. How can this be? We'll discuss both the specific events today, and their meaning, and how they play out.

We recall then that what is called "paganism," a traditional religion of the Roman empire, was polytheistic, was many gods, ceremonial, had a lot of local variation, and it was eclectic--eclectic meaning that you could worship different gods in different places, different gods for different purposes, different gods for different times of your life.

There was a certain emotional vacuum, or at least a perceived vacuum, in this religion because it seemed to deny individual longing and longing in general, that longing, that sense internally that there is more to life than there appears to be. So that many adherents of other religions, including, but not limited to, Christianity believed that some part of their body was immortal, or the soul was immortal, or that the immortal soul had to be healed by religion, and not that religion should simply be a pathway to good fortune or to easing the anxieties of the material world.

So Christianity, we've said, is not so much otherworldly, focused on heaven. It is that. But even more important perhaps is its innerness, its inner worldliness, the sense that people have a interior soul that yearns for something eternal and more significant. And then Christianity was accompanied by other so-called "mystery religions," religions that also spoke to an immaterial, heroic, non-civic, non-urban type of piety, Mithraism, for example, the worship of the mother goddess Cybele. Christianity had certain advantages in terms of reaching a population, the promise of an afterlife, the commitment that it demanded of people, a religion that appealed both to the elite and to the common people, and a very strong local organization.

But Christianity was alien to the Roman Empire. The Romans did not always persecute Christianity, as they did under Diocletian. But they found Christianity alien. They didn't like the fact that Christianity was intolerant.

Every other religion of the Roman Empire, with one exception, accepted other gods. If you worshipped Isis, you had nothing against other people worshipping Jupiter. If you worshipped Cybele, you had nothing against other people worshipping Mithra. But Christianity, of course, ridiculed all of these gods. The only other religion that was like this was Judaism. But Judaism made some accommodations with the Roman Empire, recognized the authority of the Roman emperor, and did not defy the state in the way that Christianity at least appeared to.

And Christianity was not a Roman religion in many of the ways that it rejected worldliness, rejected engagement in or enjoyment of the material world:the pleasures of the theater, the circus, the celebrations of civic paganism, emperor worship, law courts. Well, law courts may not be pleasurable. But this sort of civic involvement of the emperor and the Empire are rejected by Christianity. Christianity, when you see what Roman pagans write about it, is a kind of killjoy religion. It's a religion of people who seem to have their eyes focused on anything but the actual process of getting ahead in Roman society.

All of this notwithstanding, it should be emphasized that Christianity was not persecuted constantly nor was the persecution very intense. We have Nero in the late 60s AD, the Decian persecution of the mid-third century, and of course, the great persecution under Diocletian. Christianity received just enough persecution, one might say, to fortify its spirit, to give it some backbone, but not enough to break it.

Chapter 2: Constantine¡¯s Rise to Power [00:07:03]

Constantine emerged from the chaos following Diocletian's abdication. Diocletian, and as you'll recall, had created this four man rule, the Tetrarchy, in order to divide what was perceived as an excessively large empire with an excessively large administrative structure. The Tetrarchy was, at least we can say with hindsight, doomed to failure. These four emperors would not cooperate. They would tend to be rivals.

Constantine was the son of one of the caesars, one of the subordinates. Remember there were two augusti, two caesars. His father was ConstantiusChlorus who was appointed when the Tetrarchy began in the West in 293. So there was an Augustus of the West and a Caesar of the West. The Caesar of the West was ConstantiusChlorus. The young Constantine was sent east to serve the eastern Augustus, who succeeded Diocletian, Galerius.

Constantine was left out of the succession when Diocletian abdicated. Galerius appointed somebody else, and Constantine rebelled. Constantine, in 306, raised an army in faraway Britain, marched on Gaul, and eventually was grudgingly recognized by Galerius as caesar. At the same time, another disinherited son of an augustus, a man named Maxentius, rebelled in Rome.

And I will not burden you with the whole working out of these intrigues, of the fightings of armies, of the quarrels of augusti and caesars. But basically, in 311, Galerius, who had been ill with cancer, died. And Galerius was succeeded by an emperor in the East named Licinius. And Licinius allowed Constantine to deal with the usurper Maxentius in the West. So we have Licinius in the east in 311, and then in the West, Constantine and Maxentius fighting it out. Galerius has died.

Constantine defeated Maxentius at a battle not far from Rome, the Battle of the Milvian Bridge. The Battle of the Milvian Bridge in 312. And Constantine was now Augustus in the West, Licinius, Augustus in the East.

Chapter 3: The Battle of the MilvianBridge and Constantine¡¯s Conversion [00:10:12]

The Battle of the Milvian Bridge is the context for whatever had happened that changed Constantine's mind about his religious orientation. Just before the Battle of the Milvian Bridge, something happened. There are two stories that purport to explain the event.

One is that Constantine had a dream. And in this dream, an angel spoke to him and ordered him to paint a symbol combining the Greek letter chi and the Greek letter rho on his soldiers' shields. The rho, the R in Greek, and the chi written as an X. The two letters symbolize, or at least were taken later to symbolize, Christ, the first letter being a chi, the second a rho.

The second version, which is later, that is, later in circulation as a story, but seems perhaps to have been attested by the emperor himself to his biographer, Eusebius. According to Eusebius, Constantine was marching with his army before the battle. And he, along with the army, saw a cross in the sky. And superimposed on the sun, against which background the cross appeared, were the words, "In this sign, you will conquer."

Hard to say which version, if either, is what Constantine thought happened to him. The argument for the second one is partly Eusebius's description, partly the fact that angels in a dream are a standard kind of story. On the other hand, the Chi Rho symbol is not previously a sign of Christianity. So the very fact that there isn't a background to that, that this is something that we hear of now for the first time, might indicate that that's the true story.

But more important than what actually happened is that there's no reason to doubt Constantine's sincerity. There is no reason to believe that this was a calculating, cynical, or politically astute move. This is not because Constantine wasn't devious. He was. But because it's hard to imagine any emperor thinking that Christianity was a good idea. Because Christianity was subversive of Roman values. And it was particularly subversive of the values of the Roman army, whose crucial aid Constantine depended on and of which Constantine had to be the leader not only in order to defeat Maxentius, but simply to survive in power.

Christianity was pacifist. At this time, it took more literally than it would later the admonitions of Christ in the Gospels not to fight, not to hit back, not to engage oneself in the pursuit of worldly gain by means of violence. So it's hard to imagine anything more unlikely than an emperor becoming Christian and gaining the support of his followers.

Now that doesn't mean that Constantine became some sort of monk, interpreted the Gospels literally, told his soldiers to put down their weapons. It's clear that Constantine regarded the Christian god much as other emperors had regarded, say, the Invincible Sun, or the genius of the divine emperor, or any other pagan deity that brought victory in war. Constantine, like all emperors, saw himself as a child a fortune, as someone who was favored by fortune, depended on fortune, and who needed to placate, to mollify, to please whatever god it was that controlled fortune.

What's unusual is that he would deem the Christian god to be this sort of god, a leader of war, a giver of victory in battle, a companion to the emperor. None of this would seem, at first glance, to be likely in Christianity. The fact that not only does it work, but that it would work for centuries later is just part of the cataclysmic nature of this event, or if not cataclysmic, at least unexpected.

Constantine was not ignorant. He's someone who had studied philosophy, who was quite literate, knew Greek pretty well, familiar with Latin literature. But nevertheless, he was obviously a man of affairs. He's not an intellectual, contemplative person, poring over philosophy books. He's a man of power, decisiveness, strategy, and not a little cruelty and brutality.

And we can see that after his conversion experience-- and indeed, I should point out he did beat Maxentius-- he accepted the Christian god, he went to battle with the usurper, and he defeated him. But even after his victory, he doesn't become, in every respect, a totally committed Christian at least in terms of the symbols of power of his office. His coins, for example, which are a very good mark of propaganda and self-regard, his coins kept the imagery of the earlier pagan deity associated with the emperor, the Invincible Sun. After a little while, you start to see the Invincible Sun on one side of the coin and the cross on the other. And only later in his reign do we have just the cross.

Chapter 4: Constantine as a Christian Emperor [00:17:01]

Constantine's first substantive act as a Christian or as someone who favored the Christian church was the Edict of Tolerance. The Edict of Tolerance or Edict of Toleration issued at Milan in 313 was jointly the product of Constantine and Libanius, now the two last guys standing. The Augustus of the East, Libanius, and Constantine, the Augustus of the West.

Libanius was a pagan. He did not share Constantine's bizarre enthusiasm, but all right. If he wanted to tolerate Christianity, this was fine. This was part of their-- I'm sorry. It's not Libanius. Libanius is a philosopher. Licinius. Licinius. Constantine and Licinius.

Licinius was a pagan, but he was willing to go along with toleration. At this point, Christianity was legalized. But in the west, Constantine came to favor the Church and do more than merely accept it as legal. For example, he returned property confiscated in the Diocletianic persecutions. He exempted the Church from state taxation, an incredible gift, and allowed church officials, bishops and others, to use the imperial communications system, the so-called post system whereby they could get fresh horses to go from one place to another, greatly speeding up their journeys and making the journeys, in effect, chargeable to the state.

Constantine left the pagan and ceremonial center of Rome alone, for the time being at least, and built two great basilicas on its outskirts. One, Saint Peter's. The St. Peter's that stands today is, of course, a product of the Renaissance and the Baroque. But the old church that was destroyed in the sixteenth century was that of Constantine. And he also built the Lateran Basilica. Both of these outside the walls of Rome.

As we'll discuss, he also attempted to mediate in disputes involving the church. He never, however, completely marginalized the old religions. He emphasized the diversity of religious practice. He didn't require a single form of worship. But by the time he died in 337, the pace of conversions was such that perhaps as much as half of the Empire had embraced Christianity. And this brings us to a crucial question, of course, that we'll be discussing really throughout the semester, and that is what was the effect of Constantine's conversion on the Church? Or beyond the mere event of 312, what did it mean for the Church to go from persecuted minority to established majority? What explains Constantine's ability not only to change the course of the Roman religious practice and tendencies, but to do so permanently? For the Church, was this turnaround a providential sign or a kind of Trojan horse gift in which the Church would now be so tied to the official culture that it would never be able to shake off Rome, administration, and bureaucracy to get back to its original, charismatic, individual, powerful foundations?

The era of Constantine establishes the problem of the Church in the world for the Middle Ages and, indeed, beyond. This problem is: is the church a collection of special people who have their eyes fixed on heaven or, is it a kind of universal society that is hard to distinguish from just worldliness and engagement with the world of business, life, death, and other banalities? It is Saint Augustine who is going to deal with this most forcibly in terms of theory, but that's a century later or so, well, 75 years later.

Externally, the Church adapted very quickly to success. We can see this in terms of the pace of conversion, as I said. Not only were 50% of the people, perhaps, Christian by 337 when Constantine died, but by 390, the time of the Emperor Theodosius and his death, 395, probably 90% of the population was at least nominally Christian. The reasons for this success. In other words, how could Constantine's particular gesture have such a decisive impact? Some of this has to do with Christianity's willingness to adopt to the customs of the Empire. Some of it may have to do with the weakness of the official religion of Rome and of the urban elites who were its chief support.

Those who held out against Christianity were, on the one hand, people in the rural areas, so peasants, whose fundamental beliefs tended to be directed to agriculture, local deities, deities that controlled the weather, and water, and things like that. The army, for reasons I've just said, that is, Christianity is not, at first glance, congenial to people who fight for a living. And then the third group that held out were the intelligentsia, particularly of Roman and Athens, the people who had a substantial cultural investment in Greek and Roman philosophy, the intellectual side of the old elite.

Chapter 5: The City of Constantinople [00:23:50]

Well, Constantine fell out with Licinius. And after some small skirmishes, Constantine managed to defeat him at a place called Chrysopolis in 324. Licinius fled from the battlefield, Constantine's forces caught up with him, and Licinius was executed. This event, this Battle of Chrysopolis, important in itself-- P-O-L-I-S-- important in itself was even more important because it showed Constantine the importance of the small fortress city of Byzantium, not far away. Byzantium who is the ancestor of the city that Constantine would found there, Constantinople.And of course, modern Istanbul in its twenty-first century incarnation.

Byzantium commanded a strategic point of access east-west and north-south. It was the point of access between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. The Bosphorus is a narrow strait that separates Europe from Asia. Byzantium, Constantinople, Istanbul stands on the west bank, the European side, but it commands and controls the channel by which anyone would go from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea. And since the Black Sea is the gateway to central Asia, it, in effect, controls communications between two commercial, strategic, and military zones. It also controls the route from the Balkans, southeastern Europe, into Asia, into, specifically in this case, Asia Minor or the Asian part of what's now Turkey.

Byzantium is, therefore, strategically located in terms of communication and, at the same time, located so that an army can get to two of the most dangerous frontiers of the Roman empire in a reasonable amount of time without having to commit itself to one or the other totally. It is not far from the Danube frontier, which was, as we said, one of the points at which the empire met the Barbarian tribes and which the empire had sort of decided on as its natural frontier. And Constantinople was also not that far from the eastern frontier of the Roman Empire, the frontier with Persia, which ran along what's now eastern Turkey, Armenia, western Iran, and Iraq.

It was the city, also, within the richest part of the empire. As we said, one of the problems of the Empire in its later years, its later centuries was that the east was becoming richer, more urban, more commercial. The west was lagging behind, more rural, less successful in its commerce.

Constantine wanted an eastern capital for both strategic and for economic reasons. For strategic reasons having to do with the movement of the armies and the protection of the frontier. For economic reasons having to do with taxation and administration.

The city of Rome itself was somewhat isolated, strangely enough since, of course, the whole empire had grown up around Rome. But Rome was the historical origin of the Empire, but not, in the fourth century AD, its actual living capital. It would be too much to compare it, say, to the relationship between Portugal and Brazil. It's not quite that lopsided. But Brazil is a former colony of Portugal. They speak the language of Portugal. ?Yet on the world stage, Brazil is larger than Portugal, more important than Portugal, richer now than Portugal. So whatever preeminence Portugal, or its capital, Lisbon, has within the world of culture, no Brazilian would take Lisbon to be the be all and end all of the Portuguese cultural world. So similarly, by this time, Rome has become less important even within the western empire. And this relocation of the capital to Constantinople, the relocation of the capital to the east is significant because it shows us the permanent result of the Tetrarchy.

As we¡¯ve said, Diocletian's experiment was a failure in the sense that the emperors and caesars would not cooperate. And such a scheme was never tried again. But the division of the Empire between east and west would be something that would eventually become permanent. Its first traces are with Diocletian, and that's one reason why we begin the course with him. It is also something that continues under Constantine without the addition of the caesars. Constantine ruled over the whole empire. He did not divide it himself, but he facilitated its conceptual, and eventually real, political division by creating a new Rome, a new capital in the former fortress of Byzantium, a town that he modestly named after himself.

Constantinople, as this town was called, was planned to be a new Rome. Like Rome, it would have a forum; it would have civic spaces; it would have races and sporting events. It would have imperial palaces and gardens; it would have victory columns, triumphal arches, aqueducts, the whole panoply of classical civilization. It wouldn't have a whole lot of temples. Churches would be more important than temples, not that Constantine totally banned temples from Constantinople. But these were not the highlights of the city.

It is an ideological statement like other planned, great, imperial sites. So we could compare it to, in the modern world, Saint Petersburg, created by the czars as a certain kind of statement, with a certain kind of plan, and a certain kind of look evoking western Europe in particular. Or Versailles, not a town at all, but rather a kind of palace city fit for the king of France.

Chapter6: Constantine intervenes in Church Doctrine [00:31:32]

At this point, Constantine becomes considerably more devout and somewhat more intolerant. We start to see him interact with the Christian Church in its most intimate way, that is to say, doctrine. Constantine is appealed to by the Donatists, schismatics--well, we're calling them schismatics--or heretics, as they were decided to be, from North Africa. The Donatists taught that the priests who had given over the scriptures under persecution at the time of Diocletian were not legitimate priests. And we'll talk later about the implications of this.

The implications, briefly, are that the Church cannot cover for priests, that the office is not greater than the man. If the man has committed a sin, such as what was called treason, the handing over of the scriptures to the persecutors, he no longer can baptize validly, he no longer can perform the sacraments with validity. Donatism, then, implies that the Church itself is really just as good as the character of its officials. The Donatists were strong in North Africa, and they appeal to Constantine against decisions that had been made against them within the Church. The fact that Christians are appealing to the emperor already, as early as 317, shows the acceptance of the emperor as a Christian arbiter. But it also shows a kind of, in retrospect, dangerous intermingling of what we would consider to be church and state.

Similarly, Constantine would get involved in controversies over the relationship between God, the Father, and Christ, the Son. This, too, we'll go into in more detail, but this is the Arian heresy-- Arian with an "i", not with a "y"-- named after a priest named Arius who taught that while Christ is God, he is, in some sense, subordinate to God the Father. This is a controversy over the nature of the Trinity in which Christ is seen as coming from God, as emanating from God. And as I think I warned at the beginning of the course, if you don't like doctrinal and theological controversy, I'll try to spare you all its ins and outs, but you can't teach this course without it.

Again, what we're talking about now is not the content of Arianism, who embraced it, why, but the fact that the Emperor gets involved in these controversies. On the one hand, this shows the quick adaptation of the Church to imperial rule. On the other hand, because Constantine was able to solve neither the Donatist nor the Arian division, at least not definitively, and at least not yet, it shows how difficult it was for an emperor who could conquer all of his secular rivals, who could control this vast realm from Gibraltar to the Tigris and Euphrates, but couldn't get a bunch of North African peasants to obey his orders about how to worship, or Egyptian priests either.

Constantine, we can see, is frustrated by this. You can see in the reading from Jones, his difficulties in dealing with this in the usual way. The usual way being the emperor is petitioned by people, he appoints some arbiters or judges, the judges make a decision, and then the emperor announces to these people that that's what it's going to be. The problem is that, of course, people like the Donatists were already used to martyrdom. Threatening them with imprisonment, threatening them with torture, denouncing them, trying to use the awesome, awe-inspiring power of the emperor against them was not going to be sufficient. Nevertheless, Constantine, far from abandoning Christianity in frustration, becomes more and more engaged in trying to, if not officially Christianize the Empire, at least legislate as a Christian emperor. By 330, he has come to see himself not merely as an emperor who has a kind of peculiar favor or a peculiar god that is following him, but as the implementer of the mission of the Church. So for example, he starts promulgating laws against married men having concubines-- ineffective-- or the seduction of wards by their guardians, or punishing rape by burning, all orientation towards sexual crimes that shows a more Christian horror of them than the more easygoing Roman attitude.

Constantine favors the church, enacts legislation recommended by the church, favors the bishops, and even in the 320s, presides over the first ecumenical council of bishops of the Church called at Nicaea across the Bosporus from Constantinople, the Ecumenical Council of Nicaea called to deal with the Arian controversy. And here, we see Constantine as something different from an emperor merely the companion of Christ or the companion of God, but the emperor as, in some sense, head of the Church. Constantine appears at the council, he is deferred to by the bishops. Nevertheless, he is not himself a bishop.

He is not himself, however imperial the Church may look, able to legislate by himself for the church. Because unlike many other religions-- and certainly when we come to Islam, you'll see the contrast-- the political leader of the Roman Empire is not the designated leader of the religious practice of the Church because he is not a priest. Now who is the designated leader of the church is not clear yet. Certainly, it's not yet the pope in the 320s. It is the collectivity of bishops, but in that case, then some bishops have more power than others. Nevertheless, this is the beginning of an era in which we have a blending, but not a total equivalency of secular rule, imperial rule, on the one hand, and spiritual or church rule on the other. And that's one of the things that, of course, characterizes our image of the Middle Ages, a period in which the church and the state were overlapping, if not actually fused.

Chapter 7: Constantine and Diocletian [00:39:38]

Constantine in relation to Diocletian, to conclude.Differences and similarities. Obviously, their similarities are great. Both Diocletian and Constantine remade the Roman Empire as a much more tightly administered state, a more bureaucratically complicated state, and a more militarized state. Constantine continued Diocletian's military and administrative structure. Like Diocletian, in order to do this, he had to rely on very heavy taxation. If anything, his taxation had to be greater because he had exempted the Church and its clergy, and someone was going to have to make up the difference.

But Diocletian had persecuted the Catholic church, whereas Constantine would favor it. And that is, of course, a crucial difference. On the other hand, even here there are some connections. Under Diocletian, the emperor was a god. The emperor was a distantly glimpsed figure. He was no longer, even in pretense, first citizen, guy just like you and me, hand-shaker, baby-kisser, anything like that.

But this was also true with Constantine. Constantine, too, had a ceremonial, distant, and--because of his association with the Church--semi-sacred status. He couldn't be worshipped as a god, to be sure, but he was something a bit more than merely a follower of Christianity. Constantine ended the Tetrarchy, but he really set the seal on the division of the Empire east and west, as we've just said, by the establishment of Constantinople.

And finally, Constantine was a little more successful economically. Diocletian did not have the means available to Constantine who had a certain amount from the old pagan temple treasures that he was able to confiscate. And also, by virtue of his victory over Licinius, he was able to rule pretty tightly over the Empire.

The fourth century often is seen as a period of decline because we're focused-- we-- historians are focused on the collapse of the Roman Empire in the late fifth century. But obviously, people in 337, the year that Constantine died, did not know that in 476 the Western Empire would collapse. They did not know that in 410 Visigoths would invade and plunder the city of Rome, no more than we have the faintest idea of what's going to happen 75 or 100 years from now. From their point of view, the Empire had been restored. The Empire, which had been endangered in the third century by invasions, inflation, armed forces out of control, chaotic imperial succession, was now stable.

It was clear who the emperor was. The barbarians had been pushed back behind the frontiers. Trade, culture, civilization seemingly flourished. And if we trust the impressions we have of contemporaries, both formal, written work and informal, things like the slogans that people put in their dining room mosaics, for example, good times had been restored. This seems to be the constant theme. And I emphasize this because, again, it's a lesson in how history cannot be seen from the front backwards. You can't use hindsight to tell what people should have felt.

People in the fourth century at the time of Constantine were optimistic. No more so those people who had embraced Christianity as the coming thing, as the religion of not only truth, but of success. What is odd is, of course, that thus far, Christianity would have seemed to be unlikely. Christianity would have seemed to be alien from the Empire. And even if some emperor embraced it for weird reasons of its own, his own, it wouldn't have seemed to have been the most favorable context for the preservation of the Empire.

And indeed, of course, the Empire would fail in the west within a century and a half or so of the embrace of Christianity. And it's no surprise, then, that the English historian of the Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon, whose Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire sort ofsets the agenda for any course like this one. It's no accident that Gibbon blamed Christianity for the fall of the Empire. But indeed, in the fourth century, it seemed that Christianity was one of the forces that had saved the Empire. And not only that, as we will see as this course unfolds, much of what was preserved from the debacle of 476 and successive problems of the preservation of civilization would be preserved through the action of the Church. Thanks very much.

Lecture 4 - The Christian Roman Empire [September 12, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Good morning. Questions or problems?

So today, this week, we begin to talk more seriously about religion. And I remind you, we're talking about Christianity in particular not because of its spiritual teachings, exactly, but we're interested in the Church as a power and as a power dealing with, allied to, but different from the Roman Empire. Everything changes with the conversion of Constantine. The Church becomes first tolerated, then official, and then finally the sole legal religion, except for Judaism, by order of the Emperor Theodosius the Great in 393.

On the other hand, in order to understand the Church as a power or the politics of this period, we do have to understand the doctrine, because people fought over doctrine. And as you've seen in the Jones reading, they invoked the emperor's intervention. This is not a question as might be what you would expect today of a religion split about various problems of dogma solving those problems itself or splitting off into two factions.

The questions over the relationship between the persons of the Trinity, Arianism, or the nature of priestly office, Donatism, provoked right from the year of Constantine's conversion, 312, divisive fights. And they're only the first. I urge you to have fun with heresies. Heresies are neat. Professor Carlos Eire is teaching a freshman seminar, I believe. Is it not called "Basic Heresies." What is it?

Student: "Essential Heresies."

Professor Paul Freedman: "Essential Heresies." Yes, even better. And I don't know of any quiz shows where you can demonstrate expertise on this, but there ought to be. Or there ought to be sites on the Internet where you can get a perfect score. We're only touching the surface, the proverbial tip of the iceberg, to use a clich¨¦.

There are lots of heresies. There's a lot of division in the church. Why not just say, "Hey, you believe that the Father is superior to the Son, and I believe that they're coequal. So what? " That's so 2011. Or actually, it's so 2000. Because we ought to be used to religious doctrines having military or other kinds of violent effects.

So I'm not going to have to justify for you the fact that we're spending some time on religion, I hope. But if you do want me to, just remind me what the rationale is. If your roommates are bothering you because you're quizzing them about the relation between the persons of the Trinity, have them email me or set up an appointment, and I'll explain why it's important. I'd be glad to do this as a public service. Or my Facebook page, whatever.

This is a situation created by Constantine. We've seen Constantine's fairly long reign transform the Roman Empire. We emphasized the creation of the city of Constantinople as a second capital and the favor shown towards the church, so that when Constantine died in 337, 40%, 50%, a large percentage of the Empire's population was Christian. When he died, the Roman Empire seemed to have been restored to its former glory.

That chapter that begins the reading for today in Brown's World of Late Antiquity is entitled, "A World Restored." And he emphasizes this because, traditionally, historians saw the fourth century through the lens of the sack of Rome in 410 as a period of decline. In 410, as we will discuss next week, the city of Rome was pillaged and partly burned by the Visigoths, a--I hate to use the word "tribe," but don't tell anybody--tribe of barbarians who had entered the Empire across the Danube and the Balkans.

This was a cataclysmic event, and it ushered in successive crises in the Western Empire that would lead to its collapse. This weakness of the Western Empire is partly military, partly political, and partly internal, a result of weaknesses, of instability, culture, and the economy. It's always hard to say why empires fall in some absolute sense, even though we can see in retrospect the signs of their decline.

One of the signs Brown talks about in the reading for today fairly extensively, and that is the inequality among the rich and poor grows. On the other hand, this is a period of inequality, but also social mobility. There are a lot of paths open to barbarians, even. In this period, barbarians become important figures in the Roman army. And indeed, the army is a path of upward social mobility, a very important one.

In general, as I've said, between 337 and 410, between the death of Constantine and the sack of Rome, people did not see themselves as living in a period of decline. They did see themselves as living in a period of real change, the most dramatic of which was the movement towards Christianity. And the most dramatic example of that movement is the reign of the Emperor Julian.

I've given you a handout that shows the emperors of this period. Notice that some of them reign in the East, some in the West, and then some, usually briefly, reunify the empire. We're in a transitional period ushered in by Diocletian when the Empire is sometimes divided and sometimes not. With the death of Theodosius in 395, the third-to-last of those emperors on the list, he had been sole emperor for three years. With his death and the division of the Empire between his son Honorius, ruling from Ravenna--the Western capital now, in what's now northern Italy--and Arcadius, ruling from Constantinople, from that point on, we can really speak of two different emperors. And almost always, there were two emperors until the collapse of the Western Empire in the late fifth century. Questions at this point?

Chapter 2: Julian the Apostate [00:08:09]

So the reign of Julian the Apostate-- "Apostate" because he was born as a Christian and tried to restore the traditional Roman religion-- 360 to 363. His failure shows the weakness of what we can call paganism or traditional Roman religion. By this time, Christianity was too big to roll back. Julian tried. He tried to reestablish the temples. He tried to reestablish the vigor of the cults of the gods. He was an eclectic worshiper of many different gods, but he also was a philosopher.

He is a wonderful, if sad, example of an intellectual in power. Very few of these emperors were what would be called intellectual in the sense--many of them were cultivated,they liked the equivalent of classical music and art. But Marcus Aurelius is a philosopher, and Julian at least is a would-be philosopher. He had a beard. He studied in Athens.

He was very unsuccessful, though. People did not follow his doctrines. He was a very good military leader. His troops, when he was on the Rhine frontier in what's now France and Germany, were extremely loyal to him. But as emperor, not only did the church oppose him, but many of his own followers did. He died in an unsuccessful campaign against the Persians of perhaps murdered--unclear. But with his defeat, the end of civic polytheism, of that traditional urban, upper-class worship of the Olympian gods was in permanent eclipse.

The decree of the Emperor Theodosius that I referred to already of 393 proclaiming Christianity the only legal religion, except for a small space allowed for Judaism, did not really mean that everybody in the Empire was a practicing Christian. The two groups [correction:? most significant group] that would be outside of that definition are the people of the countryside, a very large number of people who would either continue their traditional polytheistic local worship of local gods or assimilate that worship to Christianity.

We're going to be talking a lot about saints in a couple of weeks. On some obvious level, which I don't want to exaggerate but which is nevertheless there, the saints--and there are many of them--they are holy figures. They're not gods, but they're more powerful than human beings. The saints are a kind of substitute for polytheism. We'll talk about why and how that works.

The other class that tended to resist Christianity to the last was the very upper stratum of the Roman senatorial elite--the people who were the most cultivated adherents of the traditional religion--and philosophers, people who followed Plato, for example, known as the Platonists. And we're going to come to them, because they're very important for Augustine's Confessions.

Constantine was succeeded by his sons. After two of the sons died, Constantius ruled alone. Constantius assured that he would rule alone by massacring most of his family. Julian was one of only two that he allowed to survive, and he shouldn't have, because Julian overthrew him. This is brass-knuckle politics, I guess.

Chapter 3: Essential Heresies: Arianism and Donatism [00:12:17]

The chief preoccupations of these rulers of the fourth century were the same as when we started out: the Persian threat on the eastern frontier, the barbarian threat on the Rhine-Danube frontier. But there are also other problems that the third-century emperors had not faced, and these are religious problems. They are, in particular, Arianism and Donatism. And we've seen a little bit about these from the reading about Constantine for the first assignment, but let's go over this.

Arianism. Please remember that with a "y", this takes on a completely different meaning. Aryan is this discredited racial theory identified, but not invented by, Nazism. Arian with an "i" is a follower of Arius. Arius was a priest from Alexandria influenced by ideas from Plato about the absolute and unknowable nature of God. Any religion, but Christianity in particular, has a problem: If you make God too absolute and unapproachable, then why does he care about us? If you make Him too approachable, then how is he powerful enough to transcend the world?

Platonism--that is, the philosophy of followers of Plato--emphasizes the absolute, emphasizes the inferiority of what we can understand with our eyes, with our other senses, and the superiority of the spiritual. The reason the spiritual is superior to the material in Platonism and in Buddhism and in many other philosophies is that the material is mortal, rots, dies, passes away.

The problem for many people, not just people in the modern world, is that the material is right here, and the spiritual is hard to apprehend or prove. But most people who think about it most of the time in history agree that the spiritual is superior, because it is immortal. Therefore, those who emphasize the spiritual emphasize this kind of unknowability, the mystery, the not-easy-to-apprehend-ness of the supernatural.

For Platonists and for Arians, God was placed infinitely high above us. Now, Christianity has as its great strength, in many respects--just speaking of the power of ideas--the fact that God becomes man. Christ is incarnated; that means he becomes flesh. This is not a common religious idea. Mohammed is not God. He is a messenger. In Judaism, there are prophets, but they are not made of the same substance as God. There are religions in which a holy man becomes supernatural--a lot of religions of the East.

But in Christianity, Christ is God. God is manifested in three forms--the Trinity--the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Arianism says that Christ is essentially different from God the Father in some fundamental way, that Christ was created by God as a way of interacting with the world.

If you have studied Plato or were in DS and remember some of those key concepts, in Platonism, there's the One, and then there's the Demiurge. The Demiurge is this hard-working guy or hard-working force, whatever you want to call it, who interacts between the divine and the material. He's divine, all right, but he creates things. He's the one who is out there creating the spirit as well as matter, creating the world and the universe, indeed, as we know it, while the One is at rest.

So similarly in Arianism, Christ is the one who's intervening on Earth, indeed, sacrificing Himself for humanity. God the Father remains in heaven. This is not what Christianity most of the time teaches. Christianity or the Orthodox or Catholic view is that Christ and God are of the same substance. The Arians therefore are subordinationists. They subordinate Christ to God.

A convenient way of remembering them is their tagline: "There was a time when Christ was not." It's a supernatural, metaphysical time, but God made Christ. This goes against the creed enacted at Nicaea, which to this day is the standard confession of faith of Christian denominations. The Nicene Creed, as it is known, says that all persons of the Trinity are eternal, co-eternal. God did not create Christ.

Now, Arianism appealed to people partly because they worried about the Trinity. The Trinity could be denounced by anti-Christians as actually three gods. How could God be both one and three? Also, people who worried about the physicality of Christ--Christ becomes flesh, dies, suffers--how can God be God if he dies and suffers?

Arianism, you have to take seriously as something that is not just troubling the intellectuals. It is not just something for people with a lot of time and leisure on their hands. It's not for philosophy majors. It's not even for religious studies majors. It's not even for the Roman equivalent of college graduates. The barbarians--and I deliberately avoid calling them the German barbarians--but the first barbarians to convert to this religion were more or less--and as time goes, on historians emphasize less--but more or less Germanic tribes.

The missionaries who converted them were Arians in the mid-fourth century, which is the high tide of Arianism in the Roman Empire. When the German tribes or the barbarian tribes entered the Empire beginning in the 370s, Arianism was all but over within the Empire. The Council of Nicaea in the 320s and the Council of Constantinople in 381 pretty much defined Arianism as a heresy, and by 381, it was on the run in the Empire. But ironically, the new rulers of the West would be mostly Arians well into the fifth and, in some cases, sixth centuries.

Donatism, or the Donatists. The Donatists--here we're not dealing with doctrine or metaphysical questions of the relationship of the persons of the Trinity. We're dealing with the nature of the priesthood, hence the nature of the church. It's a question of the office or the man.

If it turns out that I do not have a Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, or indeed that I am an impostor, that somehow I tricked the Yale computer, have been showing up here, teaching History 210, and am just some random guy--like the guy who is obsessed with the New York City transit and has gotten various passes to get in to drive trains and maintenance yards and stuff like that--if I turn out to be like that, you will nevertheless get credit for this course, I assure you. Because Yale, as an official body, is the one who grants your degree, gives you credits, and they were responsible for hiring me.

So if I've imposed a fraud on them, you nevertheless receive credit. You don't have to do a background search of me. You don't have to find out about how many pets I have or my credit status or my mortgage, because you rely on Yale to do that.

Think of this then in terms of the priesthood. If it turns out that the priest is not a nice guy--and alas, that happens--or a sinner--or what the Donatists really cared about was he had buckled under threat of torture or the reality of torture during the persecution of Diocletian and had, say, burned the scripture or renounced Christianity--if your priest is bad, is your baby baptized? That's what Donatism is about, and Donatism answers, no. No. It depends on the virtue of the officiate.

You can't have a priest who was what they called a traditor. Traditor is an interesting Latin word, T-R-A-D-I-T-O-R, because it means both "tradition"--or is the root of the word "tradition," but also of "traitor." It's the handing down or handing over of something, the giving up of something. So one can speak of the handing down of--our family has cranberry sauce with slivered almonds, that's our tradition--or handing over state secrets, military strategy, or the scripture to the authorities.

The Donatists accused priests who had or they believed had capitulated to Roman persecutorial pressure in the last years of Diocletian. They branded them as traitors, and they said that they could not perform legitimate sacraments. Therefore you, in North Africa, where the Donatists were strong, you as an ordinary Christian had better do a background check on your priest, because your marriage is illegitimate, your baby is going to hell, your whole participation in the church is, as it were, short-circuited by this defect.

Worse than that, supposing your priest is just fine--in fact, supposing it's 330 AD and your priest wasn't even born during the reign of Diocletian, but the guy who consecrated him, the bishop who anointed him was a traditor, or maybe that bishop was not, but he was anointed--it's like Christmas tree lights, at least the Christmas tree lights that I have, the analog ones. They're little bulbs, and if one of them goes, the whole string goes. If one is defective--the proverbial bad apple rotting out the entire barrel.

But the problem with that is that you can't organize a church on that basis, you can't organize a body spread from one corner of the world to another, unless you believe that the church will guarantee the sanctity of the individual minister. The office, the fact that the guy is a priest, has to be more important than the man, or else you can only have local communities. You can only trust, if you're a Donatist, somebody you grew up with and a community stable enough where you're confident of the ancestry.

Donatism lends itself to what we call "sectarianism." A sect is a small, tightly cohesive group. It does not lend itself to a church that is universal, big, massive. And it also doubts that the church itself has the power to overcome the defects of its members.

Chapter 4: Essential Heresies 2: Manicheanism [00:26:04]

Now, Manicheans are not exactly a heresy, but they appear in the Confessions, and they're very important. So since we're doing doctrinal ideas, Manicheanism is a teaching about good and evil that can be applied to other religions besides Christianity. Manicheanism basically says that good and evil have a real existence. There is a war in the universe between a good god and an evil one. And this may be applied outside of Christianity or within Christianity.

And within Christianity, the evil god is the devil, or according to the Manicheans of this period that Augustine for a while joined, the god of the Old Testament. Jehovah is the evil god, and the god of the New Testament, the Christian god, is the good one. Jehovah is the one who smites a lot of people. Jehovah is the creator god, because the Manicheans believed that matter is evil and is the source of evil. Spirit is good. The Christian god created spirit. Human beings are imprisoned in the body, and they have to figure out a way to liberate themselves from the dominion of the evil god. Vegetarianism, for a start, avoiding flesh.

But salvation means casting off the flesh. How is this different from Christianity? And doesn't this sound to you like regular old Christianity, mistrust of the flesh? The devil is identified with sexual desire or physicality, generally. Manicheanism is very useful as an explanation of evil. And this may not be something that keeps you up at night, but it will at some point, intermittently.

Where does evil come from? Why is there so much evil in the world? Why, if God is good, is there evil in the world? Sure, some of that may just be to test you--you lose your job or your business fails, but you'll get a better one--but that's not the same as horrible infant birth disabilities, or the death of people by starvation in the thousands, or choose your evil thing.

Why does this happen? One explanation is that God didn't cause it. There's another god. What's the problem with that? Why is Manicheanism not a bigger--I mean, in a way, it is. But you will travel far to meet anyone who says they're a Manichean.

Student: They think God's not omnipotent.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah, first of all, then God's not all powerful, and so then how is He God? And then instinctively, what's another problem, maybe, with it? I could say, so what? God is limited. You know, he's trying. Anybody else have a sense of the moral problem of saying, the devil made me do it?

Student: It takes away self--

Professor Paul Freedman: It takes away individual responsibility. I didn't cheat those investors. The devil cheated them. I didn't mug that Ezra Stiles student. The devil did. Anyway, this is a debate. I'm not asking you to take sides, but notice in the Confessions the attitude of Augustine towards his Manichean experience.

Chapter 5: Roman Emperors and Christian Heresies [00:30:06]

So the fourth century is a time of ideas circulating around as Christianity starts to define itself. This would merely be a chapter of the history of ideas, were it not that the Roman emperors had to intervene to settle many of these issues. So just forgive me if I am beating a dead horse, but heresy is important because of its impact in shaping the church through controversy and because it fell to the emperor to try to resolve heresy. And thus marks the beginning of a merger of church and state in a way that would become characteristic of the entire Middle Ages.

The other thing to remark is that the emperor did not have a lot of success with this, almost ever. It's very frustrating for an emperor who can get someone killed immediately. All he's got to do is say, "You dropped that lark's tongue pie.Take him away and kill him." But he can't seem to do this with heretics, partly because heretics love persecution. It just toughens them.

So you have the Prefect of Africa writing to Jones [correction:? to Constantine as you¡¯ve read in the jones book] and saying that this bishop in North Africa, Caecilian, has been attacked as a traditor. And Constantine does what emperors usually do, they appoint local judges as experts. They say, go and have a hearing and find out what's going on, and make a recommendation to me. He makes a recommendation telling the Donatists to go home and shut up. They don't. They appeal to the emperor. The emperor says, "Go home and shut up." And they don't. They defy the emperor himself. They go back to North Africa, and they continue preaching against traitors.

Constantine, why does he intervene? Why didn't he just say, the hell with you-- pretty literally-- or, it's a matter of opinion, or, this doesn't get at the core the faith?

Student: He's afraid of upsetting God.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah. He's afraid of upsetting God. Remember, we said that Constantine was not much of a philosopher, not much of a contemplative. He had won a battle with the favor of the Christian God. Now the Christian God-- he was the companion of the Christian God. The Christian God has him by the hand. If the church starts dissolving into quarreling factions, God is going to be angry, and his favor will cease. We have to take the ruler's anxiety about religious unity seriously. So he changes his policy several times.

Remember, we're talking about a guy who was able to defeat all his military rivals, sent Licinius running through Asia Minor, caught and executed him. A man of tremendous capabilities. Nevertheless, dealing with these peasants and poor townspeople and, from his point of view, riff-raff who were strong in North Africa, he couldn't get them to obey him.

Sometimes he tried compromise, then persecution, then just saying, nobody can discuss this. And none of this worked. Not only did this not work, but now Arianism came to preoccupy him. And you can see in his letters, there's a kind of, "OMG, I didn't realize what I was signing up for," tone to it.

At first he was anti-Arian, pretty totally. He saw it as a denial of Christianity. If Christianity by its very name is that Christ is God, then Arianism would seem to be antithetical to that fundamental thing. So after defeating Licinius, he learned more about Arianism, which was strong in the East, and his first reaction was maybe your reaction, or certainly the reaction of anybody who's more interested in power, politics, this world. He considered it over-subtle, philosophical, and ultimately trivial.

But he couldn't get rid of it. He couldn't get rid of it, and now, instead of appointing judges, he summoned a council of the bishops of the Empire, what later would be called an ecumenical council--"ecumenical" meaning worldwide--a universal council, which met in the city of Nicaea, not right across the Bosphorus, but more or less--there's an "a" in there sometimes--more or less in the western part of Asia Minor. And it met in 325.

At this first ecumenical council--the last ecumenical council of the Catholic Church, by the way, was in the 1960s, the early 1960s under Pope John--and this ecumenical council was summoned by the emperor, and the emperor was in the room and in certain respects presided, intervened, took sides. He was very deferential to the bishops. He is not a bishop, after all. He is not a priest. He does not have the sacramental orders, but nevertheless, he was, or attempted to be, the boss of this conference.

And it came up with a formula, a definition of the creed, what every Christian must believe, saying that God and Christ are of the same essence, but different persons. God and Christ and the Holy Ghost, who's not really at issue yet--there will be a heresy involving the Holy Ghost, but not until the end the course--they are the same essence, but different persons. Same essence--the Greek word is homoousios. Christ was begotten by the Father, but not made by Him. That's a tough one. That's a tough one. He was begotten by the Father, but not in time. There wasn't three minutes after creation.

Does someone want to go out and see what that noise is? Or is it coming from outside, and we're hopeless? Thank you.

Arius gave a kind of equivocal acceptance of this arrangement, but the Bishop of Alexandria refused to accept Arius back into communion. In other words, the Nicene Creed defined orthodoxy, but fighting raged for about 50 years over the relationship between Christ and God the Father.

Constantine kept on changing his mind. Again, the poor guy only wanted unity. He wanted this to go away so that God would favor him. He died more or less an Arian. He came to believe that the Arian moderate position was the best. This is partly because of the absolute intransigence of the Bishop of Alexandria--the Archbishop of Alexandria, Athanasius. Athanasius would then later be a saint, considered the upholder of the orthodox line.

So Constantine was baptized just before he died. In this era, usually, baptism was supposed to mean that you embraced Christianity totally. It's Augustine, particularly, who's responsible for infant baptism. Infant baptism then means you enter the Christian community, but for sure you're going to sin. The understanding in the 330s was more, as a baptized Christian, I am no longer a sinner.

So if you were in an office like Constantine, where you are shedding blood, giving judgments, leading troops, you would wait until your death-bed moment before getting baptized. So he would be baptized on his deathbed by an Arian priest. What's the danger of this, parenthetically?

Student: That you die unbaptized.

Professor Paul Freedman: Die unbaptized, right. The proverbial bus hitting you on the street or sudden death of another sort. And we're going to talk--I'm sure this is going to be one of the things you will remember with pleasure--but briefly about sin, why people sin, and the interaction of good and evil in human beings. Indeed, we're going to start very soon, because it's all over the Confessions.

Chapter 6: Introduction to St. Augustine¡¯s Confessions [00:40:33]

Let me give you a little bit of orientation towards the Confessions, which I hope you will read as much as possible. Why are we reading this very personal and autobiographical work? First of all, it is a classic. How many of you, may I ask, have already read it?A certain number. It is an autobiography, which makes it very unusual. It's an intimate autobiography. It's not just highlights of my career or my resume. He talks about anxieties, desires, doubts. It is, therefore, a portrait of the mentality of a thinking person in the ancient world.

We get a better idea of the life of the spirit than from many other, most other, almost any other source. It shows the fluidity of the religious scene in the late Roman Empire. His father is a pagan. His mother is a Christian. He is first a Platonist, sort of, then a Manichean, then a Christian Platonist, and then a more fervent Christian.

So it shows some of the religious and philosophical options of this era. In doing so, we do come across important and lasting ideas of the Western tradition about evil, sin, body, and soul. We also are looking at the impact of Christianity on the Roman Empire and the relationship between Christianity and classical culture.

Some things to keep in mind as you're reading this. The book is uniquely self-revealing for its time. On the other hand, it doesn't tell us a lot of stuff we'd like to know. More time is spent going over a youthful prank involving stealing pears from an orchard than on Augustine's concubine. Concubine: a woman that you're not married to who's like a subordinate with whom you have a sexual relation. And indeed, he would have a child. Pears, Book II, towards the end, pay a lot of attention to that.

The book has a lot of prayers, quotations from scripture. It's very Biblically infused. Don't be put off by that, because the book is a confession. "Confession" has two meanings in this era. One is its meaning now, the way we usually use it, confession of sin. But it's also a confession of praise. I confess God, meaning I acknowledge God's power, and I praise Him.

Chapter 7:Platonism [00:43:51]

Finally, I just want to go over Platonists, because he both admires the Platonists, feels that they saved him from the Manicheans, but ultimately comes to doubt them. This is described fairly well in Brown, beginning on page 73. But let me just take a few minutes to discuss this.

Platonism or Neoplatonism, it's the same thing. Neoplatonism is a religious Platonism. It differs from Plato and his dialogues by being a little bit more mystical in the sense of focused on the One, trying to apprehend the One, and less interested in the city, the state, or the kinds of worldly problems that Plato dealt with.

Platonism asserts the superiority of the spirit and the inferiority of matter. But unlike Manicheanism, which basically says that matter is evil and spirit is good, for the Platonists, everything is good. Everything is good, but there are inferior goods. So matter is not evil in itself. It's just inferior. Where evil comes from is the preference of the inferior to the superior, the preference of the material manifestation to the spiritual.

So to take the most famous example--because we still have this little funny vestigial notion of so-called Platonic love--love of a sexual sort is not evil in Platonism. What is evil is assuming that that's all there is and not referring it to a higher spiritual, nonmaterial kind of love. Wealth is not bad, but the preference of wealth over spiritual things is bad. Here again, as we spoke at the beginning of the lecture, it's important to emphasize the superiority of the spiritual over the material, because the spiritual is eternal. Evil comes from not realizing the superiority of the material--of the spiritual, excuse me--or not acting on it, acting as if the material is all there is.

In Platonism, evil is a falling away, or a turning of your vision, to evoke the cave metaphor. It is a misperception, and it's the result of poor education. If you educate people to the superiority of the spiritual, they will throw off their evil ways. The reason people misbehave, kill each other, oppress each other, is that they don't know any better, and if you teach them, they'll reform.

Keep that in mind as we turn to Augustine and see what he thinks about it. He adores the Platonists because they're intellectuals. He admires them because they rescued him from the trap of Manichean dualism--that is, good versus evil, just simple forces. Platonism is an explanation of evil, but for Augustine, it's not a sufficient explanation. And that will form part of the subject matter of our next talk.

So I'll see you on Wednesday. Oh, and Wednesday, you'll get the paper topics for the first paper, which is due October 10. Thank you.

Lecture 5 - St. Augustine¡¯s Confessions [September 14, 2011]

Chapter 1: Why we read The Confessions[00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman:? Alright, so you may be asking yourself, "Why are we reading the Confessions?" I think I gave a preliminary answer before, but since it seems to be perhaps more appropriate for religious studies or philosophy, let me remind you why we're struggling through this.

First, the impact of Christianity on the Roman Empire--that is to say, the social and intellectual setting of the rise of Christianity in the late fourth, early fifth centuries.

The second is to understand some of the Christian moral and doctrinal problems and their implications. Once again, we're not exactly interested in these for reasons of theology or morality, but we need to get into the minds of people at the time in order to understand what bothered them, what controversies they were involved in, and how those controversies indeed divided the Roman Empire and the successors to the Roman Empire.

Some of those problems--well, under that second heading of Christian moral and doctrinal problems, let me just mention three, which by no means exhausts them, but are three that we can sort of, if not identify with, I think see their importance. One, the problem of evil.Second, the relation between body and soul.And three, the Christian understanding of sin and redemption. Now, it turns out these are all aspects of the same problem, and they are dealt with in Augustine's works most thoroughly, more thoroughly than any other thinker of the ancient world.

The third reason we're looking at this is the interaction between Christianity and classical culture and religion. Roman life and politics, Augustine's career and his giving up his career, what that means, other ideas within the Roman Empire, such as Manicheaism, Platonism.

And then finally, this is a document of philosophical and psychological investigation. And while that is not our primary purpose here, you should not get out of a liberal arts college program without reading this and pondering it a little. This can be summarized in terms of the importance of the humanities, even, or of philosophical investigation, as opposed to mere investigation of natural phenomena, in words that Augustine uses in Book X, which we have not read. After Book IX, Book X is a turning. It discusses time and the meaning of time. Books XI, XII, and XIII are a commentary on Genesis. Worth reading, if you like, and interesting to think about how they do or do not mesh with the more confessional parts of the Confession.

But in Book X, he says, "Men go out and gaze in astonishment at high mountains, the huge waves of the sea, the broad reaches of rivers, the ocean that encircles the world, or the stars in their courses, but they pay no attention to themselves." They are busy looking at external phenomena and not examining their own heart. And if the Confessionsis anything, it is certainly an examination of the author's heart.

But it's not an examination of his heart in a purely emotional sense, in the way we're familiar with in so-called confessional literature. I had a tough upbringing. This happened to me. That happened to me. I struggled with addiction. I beat my kids. Now I'm a great person. Whatever. This is an intellectual investigation as well as an emotional investigation.

And indeed, Augustine doesn't see these as separate, or to the degree that he does, it's in a more complicated way than just saying intellectual versus non-intellectual. He is an intellectual, obviously. And he awakened to being an intellectual, an experience that many of you may have had. Remember, he reads this dialogue by Cicero, now lost, called the Hortensius. And this convinces him that the life of the mind is the most important thing to pursue.

And I wouldn't say that we all have had this experience, but maybe you--what was the point at which you discovered that you weren't like other people, that they lived more for immediate sensations, or pleasure, or what Augustine would call debauchery, and you wanted to read or think about stuff or do lab experiments?

I think the essence of Yale, if I understand it correctly, is I don't have to choose between fun and the intellectual life. So it's not actually perhaps relevant to your lives now, but particularly if you went to a public high school, grew up in a non-intellectual environment. Those of you whose parents are professors and went to some school where everybody was reading Latin at the age of six, I'm not talking to you. But I'm talking to the vast majority who woke up one day and realized, either with pride or with dismay, "I'm different from other people." Ideas have meaning to me. I'm going to suffer in life for that, though there're going to be some rewards. And I leave you to discern what the rewards are and to mull over what the suffering has been or maybe will continue to be. I hope not, and I suspect you'll have an easier time of it.

But this book is about a search for truth and a search that takes a number of wrong turns, at least from Augustine's opinion looking back on the situation when he wrote this in the 390s. It's a confession of sin. It's also, as I said before, a confession of praise for the God whose love directed him back to the right path. It is personal, but exemplary. It is about spiritual yearning, but it is also about intellectual yearning for truth. It's a book about the education of a young man and the adventures of this young man and what he learns from them.

Chapter 2: A Brief Biography of Augustine [00:07:34]

Now, in the first place, he is both an intellectual and a passionate person. He is someone who is unusually frank about his desires. But notice that he's not just opposed to desire. He is not someone who believes that desire, love are to be simply repressed or ignored. Love is a psychological need. And he has a very discerning and interesting passage in describing his teenage years and his lusts when he frequented the brothels of Carthage. In Book III, at the beginning, he says, "I was in love with the idea of love." So he was not only in love, but he was in love with the idea of being an emotional being, of love that is both sexual and spiritual, in which these two things are not well marked off from each other.

He is also a believer in friendship. And it's funny, because in our own culture, I think friendship has changed. When I started teaching, people had trouble dealing with the affection that he has for his friends, like Alypius and Nebridius, or the mysterious unnamed friend who dies after being baptized. Augustine is always surrounded by friends. Even in the most intimate moments, when he's undergoing this conversion, there're all sorts of people right around him. And as I said before, this seemed to be--the explanation was, well, he must've been homosexual, or he must have these desires, or maybe it's part of Roman culture of friendship.

But in recent decades or years, where we have a culture of friendship, where your friends are extremely important--admittedly, if you have 900 of them, it's a little bit, perhaps, weakened--but I think we can understand some of this better than might have been the case a little while ago. This friend who dies after being baptized, here is an example of another form of seriousness. They go out and have fun together. The friend becomes ill. The friend is suddenly very serious. The friend gets baptized, because to be baptized, as with Constantine, means that you are committing yourself to a much more stringent and moral life than before.

And then he dies. And this certainly disturbs Augustine. What is life all about? Any of you who've had the experience of contemporaries of yours who have died will understand this, I think.

Augustine's also ambitious. He is a successful person. Even though he's from a modest family--his father, a pagan or non-Christian, middle class official of North Africa, his mother, a Christian--He's clearly marked for success because of his unusual gifts, his unusual gifts being intellectual, ability to write, ability to argue. He's marked out as extremely smart. And at that time, success for such a person, the course of success was through government service-- this is the era post-Diocletian, post-Constantine--and related particularly to a combination of rhetoric and law.

This is not all that different from societies familiar to us. That is to say, the training in law gives one access to a number of different kinds of political offices. But rhetoric is perhaps a little stranger to us. Rhetoric in this context means the art of persuasion. So it's very closely related to law and legal pleading. It is the art of writing well, of writing elegantly, and it is very, very highly valued in the Roman Empire.

His mother, Monica, is extremely pious. In fact, the first section, class rather that I taught--no, I guess I was a section leader--when I was a graduate student, the first section I had, my students were arguing with me about Augustine's patronizing attitude towards his mother. And I said, well, no, he's not patronizing. He's smarter than his mother. His mother's just an ordinary person. After all, Augustine becomes a saint, and his mother doesn't. Some guy from Santa Monica Catholic School said, who do you think Santa Monica is? This is Augustine's mother.

So anyway, I've learned. Augustine's mother is a saint. She is a more steadfast kind of person than Augustine. She's not someone who stays up all night wrestling with the problem of evil. Nevertheless, she does not want him to be baptized. She wants him to be successful. Like most mothers, she wants her child to be a good person. But even more than that, she wants her child to be a success. And that means delaying baptism, because if he's going to be a success, he's going to have to be involved in the world of high government, and that may mean--well, that definitely means involvement in sinfulness, involvement in the shedding of blood, involvement in legal wrangling and stuff like that.

And so he is encouraged to lead a normal life, "normal" meaning, at least in his own retrospective view, sinful life. This is what Augustine is giving up in his conversion. He is giving up a career. He is giving up a social expectation of success or social definition of success. He is giving up the pleasures attendant on that career, which range from parties to honors to sexual conquests and the whole life of a well-established member of the Roman elite.

Chapter 3: The Problem of Evil [00:14:33]

What is bothering Augustine? What bothers him is, in part, the problem of evil, which we've alluded to already. Why does a good and omnipotent god allow evil to flourish? A related problem is that compared to the works of the Greek writers and philosophers, the Bible seems awfully crude to him, rhetorically, in terms of style, and conceptually, in terms of its ideas.

The Old Testament god--and we're probably at various levels of familiarity with the Old Testament--but the Old Testament god is temperamental, I think it's fair to say. Here's a guy who decides to destroy--a guy--a deity who decides to destroy the world by flood, destroys the cities of the plain, kills one of the people bearing the tabernacle back to Jerusalem because he stumbles. What kind of god is this?

This bothers Augustine. And his anthropomorphism bothers Augustine. In the Old Testament, in the Hebrew Bible, a god speaks with people. Adam hears him walking in the garden. How can that be? How can this human-seeming god be the real God? So these two anxieties put Augustine in the camp of the Manicheans.

Remember, the Manicheans believe that the solution to the problem of evil is that God is not omnipotent. God is trying, but there's another evil god who is opposing Him. And that evil god is the god of the flesh and the god of the Old Testament, Jehovah, the creator god, the god of matter and flesh. We are souls imprisoned in flesh. Our true home is the spiritual, and we have to renounce everything that has to do with the flesh in order to go there.

So Manicheanism would seem to be extremely ascetic. You should have absolutely nothing to do with the world. But as is always the case with the statement, "everything that's material is evil, but we are material," Manicheanism also offers or affords you an opportunity to be completely involved in the world, totally involved in the world, because there's nothing you can do about it. All you can do is say, the flesh is evil, I'm in the flesh, I'm just going to have to deal with it until I am liberated into the spirit.

So Manicheanism is not necessarily world-renouncing, but they do identify the source of evil with the body. The body is wicked. The immaterial soul is good. This is not Christianity, as Augustine discovers or elaborates. Even though we may think of Christianity as exalting the soul over the body, nevertheless, it also exalts the body. Christian doctrine is that the bodies of human beings will be resurrected, not just the souls. There will be bodies after the Last Judgment in heaven and in hell.

God created the world, and it was good. What then explains the presence of evil? Augustine at this stage turns to Platonism for an understanding of the nature of evil. Evil is not a thing in itself. It is rather the absence of good. Now, if anyone has ever said that to you, you will have found that unconvincing, at least in its first iteration. Because we're not just talking about the absence of good, as in, this bowl of chili is not very good. It's not very flavorful. It's OK, but it's lacking in something. But that's not evil. Evil is not like, not particularly good. Evil is much more vivid, gratuitous, cruel, all-encompassing.

The Platonists don't deny that. What they mean by saying it's the privation of good is that it is nothingness. Evil is, in fact, the absence of being and meaning. The reason it produces such spectacular effects as war, oppression, crime, is that people turn away from the good, or they turn away from what is truly good to prefer lower goods. They turn away from the things of the spirit to the things of the flesh. They prefer their own lusts and desires, their own ambitions and greed, to the common good or to the immaterial and spiritual good. And it's this turning away from the Sun, this turning away from good, that seems to be a human problem. Human beings, generally speaking, don't understand what they're on Earth for, according to the Platonists.

Many of you are familiar with the metaphor of the cave from The Republic. This is the classic depiction of this wrong preference. The people in the cave are chained facing the back wall of the cave, and they see images of what's passing in front of the cave reflected on the wall. As time goes on, they come to believe that those images are reality. They forget that they're chained. They forget that they can't see the real things. They forget the Sun.

If you were to liberate them and turn them around and show them the light, first of all, they couldn't bear it, because they're used to the world of shadow. Secondly, they'd kill you, because you are destroying their assumptions and their world. They would at least persecute you. They're not interested in the truth. They're interested in getting by.

So for the Platonists, evil is the result of this error in perception, assuming that it's a great thing to get rich. Or assuming that it's a great thing to beat people up because you're stronger than they are. Or it's a great thing to conquer and subjugate. Or all of these things, some of which are evil but are really the preference of things that you should not be pursuing or that you should be pursuing for reasons inspired by spiritual truth.

How do you get rid of this? In the Platonists' imagination, by education. That's the whole point of Plato's dialogues. That's why they are dialogues, many of them, with a question and answer. They're very didactic. They're like being in a class. Socrates quizzes people, and then he shows the solution. And they say, "Oh, wow, Socrates, now I understand. Now I'm going to be a Platonist, and I'm going to build a perfect society." End of story.

The important thing to understand about Platonism is that it is not dualist in the way that Manicheanism is or the way that we instinctively think about evil. Evil is not opposed to good. It's hierarchically inferior to good. The Platonists' universe is like a ladder with many rungs going up from mud, bugs, rocks to the immaterial One, and with many, many steps, as I said, many rungs or steps or levels in between.

Human beings are in the middle. And also, human beings--unlike animals, mud, slugs, but also unlike angels and demiurges and deities--human beings can move up and down the ladder. That's what free will is. That's what being human is. You can read Hortensius, read the Confessions, fall in love with the liberal arts, and ascend to some very high realm of the spirit. Or you can choose the downward path to debauchery and mere pleasure. It's a question of how free you are, but we do have the opportunity to move up and down this ladder, unlike the animals and all other created forces that are fixed.

Now, the question is what makes us move up and down this? Or what'll motivate us to move up? And here we come to some key differences between Platonism and Christianity with regard to evil. Platonism tends to ascribe evil to ignorance. Christianity tends to ascribe evil to sin. The difference between sin and ignorance is that sin is deliberate. You know you shouldn't do this, and you do it anyway. You're not overcome by desire.

Chapter 4: Pears and Augustine¡¯s Conception of Sin [00:25:00]

So to anticipate one of the paper topics--but I don't think I'm going to be giving away the answer--what is it about the pear-stealing incident that makes it so important? Anybody want to venture a preliminary response to this?

Student: Well, it's the fact that he doesn't need the pears. He just does it because he feels like sinning.

Professor Paul Freedman: So the pears--he doesn't need the pears. It is just a desire. I mean, he doesn't say to himself, I want to sin. I haven't sinned in two days. He doesn't need the pears. What do they do with the pears when they get them?

Student: They chuck them.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah, they throw them out. They throw them to the pigs. So they're not hungry. It's not like, I was overcome by desire, and that led me into some sinful behavior. They weren't overcome by desire at all. How would you describe their pre-pear-stealing state? At least, what would you guess was their pre-pear-stealing frame of mind? There's one word that'll describe it, but if you want to, use a few more. Some guys go and they steal some pears from an orchard. They fool around with them. They throw them to the pigs.

Student: Bored?

Professor Paul Freedman: Bored. Bored. Now, here's something we can identify with. They're bored. They need to amuse themselves. They cannot amuse themselves by saying, "I'm a good person," or, "I'm going to contemplate the One," or, "I'm going to do some homework." It doesn't end. Young people are thought to be easily bored, but the boredom of old people, it's a different kind of bored. But there it is. It's persistent. That's not the only reason people sin, but it is a gratuitous reason. And that's what's interesting about the pears. It's gratuitous. It's not from need. The Platonists don't have a good response to why this happens, because it's not a question of education.

Now, Augustine does not invent Christian ideas of sin. If you said to Augustine, "Come on, why are you so worried about the pears?" He's not worried about the pears as such. It's just a little emblem or a little example of a different kind of problem--that is to say, knowing how to behave doesn't change us. Feeling how to behave--to put it in Freudian terms, it's not the ego that decides. It's the id. It's the instinct, not the intellect.

And that's what his conversion means. His conversion is not: "Suddenly, I was convinced that Christianity was true." He already knows that Christianity is true, but he knows it intellectually. The conversion is a conversion to an emotional apprehension of it. So however intellectual he may seem to you, however formed in the tradition of Greco-Roman classicism he was, however much the Hortensius awakened him to the life of the mind, he is ultimately a theologian and philosopher of the irrational, of the supra-rational.

And indeed, Christianity in its history has an oscillation between intellectualization and the rediscovery of sin and God's grace. If you think of movements like the Reformation of Martin Luther, John Calvin, et cetera, in the sixteenth century, it takes issue with the notion that we can do works that give us merit in the sight of God, and that the Church tells us we have accumulated merits, and therefore we'll go to heaven.

The Reformation teaches that we are face to face with God and that our so-called good deeds don't amount to anything. We are all sinful. If God operated according to justice, we would all go to hell. It's faith and grace that save people, hence the Reformation. But it's also the Great Awakening of Britain and America in the eighteenth century, the development of Methodism, the Fundamentalist movement, all of these tend to reject attempts to approach God contractually, attempts to approach God in terms of a deal.

So if human beings are sinful and if education is not going to get them out of sin, what will? Now, the Augustine of the Confessions is different than the Augustine of 20 years later when he wrote The City of God. And we're not studying The City of God, but this book, written in response to the sack of Rome in 410, develops some ideas that are found in the Confessions about the nature of sin and how we get out of it. The nature of sin is the pears. How we get out of it is at least in part the conversion. We got the pears sufficiently for the time being?

The conversion is started--well, it started long before the event. But what precipitates it as a drama is this conversation with Ponticianus in Book VIII, Part VIII, who has traveled and describes the monks of Egypt. Now, we'll be talking lots and lots about monks, but the monks of Egypt are the first example of Christian monks, men who flee the world into the desert and there live on weeds, saline water, locusts, other insects, basically nothing. And they have visions, and they are sought out by ordinary people.

It's key to understand that to be a hermit in this society does not necessarily mean that you have nothing to do with people. People start to want to find you, because you must have special power. Back in Alexandria, their baby is sick. "Maybe you, oh hermit, living on locusts and out in the desert, have some spiritual power to help my baby."

This is shamanism. It happens in all sorts of religions. You can't just be a shaman, a medicine man, a wise man, and hold down a regular old job. Or you can, but it helps. And that's the conceit of a lot of TV ideas, secret heroes. They're the real estate agents, but they're battling the forces of darkness. But generally, most of the time, you've got to be special, and you've got to look special. And you've got to be a reject. You can't have a spouse, kids, a mortgage, a garden, a swing set. You've got to be a seer. You've got to have your vision focused on the other world.

Ponticianus tells Augustine about these men, and his response is not only to be impressed by them, but to be humiliated by them. First of all, here are these guys who are intoxicated with God, while I'm still thinking about my career. But--and this is the ancient world speaking--they are uneducated, these monks of Egypt. They didn't study The Republic, the Hortensius, the Timaeus, the rhetoric of Quintilian, the Satires of Juvenal.

They don't know anything about this. They're uneducated people. Many of them are illiterate. And yet they are closer to God. They have an apprehension of the divine that causes them to renounce the world, whereas we--Augustine says of him and his circle--we "lie here groveling in this world of flesh and blood, while they storm the gates of heaven." And this is the moment of his conversion.

Now, after his conversion, Augustine's plan was to lead a life of contemplation with his friends. They would retreat from the world, meaning they would give up their careers, but it would be a little bit like one of your friend's parents have a lot of money and have this wonderful cabin somewhere in the Rockies or the Sawtooth Mountains. And you're going to figure out some kind of way of--you'll be on the Internet and everything, but you're going to have this kind of beautiful, contemplative life.

But the beautiful part is that it's not going to be uncomfortable. It's not the desert of Egypt. It's remote--you're not going to be bothered--but there are beautiful mountains, trouts in the stream. It's idyllic. And you and your friends are going to talk about reality and the spirit and philosophy and--I don't know how idyllic this sounds to you, but it's certainly an understandable idea of a way of life.

It is the ancient idea of what's called ¡°leisure with dignity¡±. And indeed, that's what being a professor was supposed to be when I signed up for it. Otium cum dignitate, leisure with dignity. "Leisure" meaning not wasting time leisure, but not responding to clients, or not responding to urgent scheduling phone calls, deals. You've got to show up to your classes, but that's not really onerous. At least, that was the idea.

And I won't go into the frustrations of being a professor or the dissatisfactions. But the classical idea is otium cum dignitate, "dignity" meaning not being naked in the desert, not having to eat locusts and figure out how to-- "OK, I had curried locusts last night. Tonight, I think I'll have locust casserole." No, no, no. Something nicer than that.

But in fact, he did not follow through on this. He did not lead a life of cultivated classical dignity with his friends. He went back to North Africa. He became a bishop. His years were consumed by disputes over doctrine or with heretical--as he deemed them--tendencies, like Donatism, most notably. And he died defending his city of Hippo, Hippo Regius, in modern Tunisia, from the Vandals, one of those barbarian invaders who will occupy us next week.

He then was very much involved in the world. To be a bishop in the Roman Empire was by no means an office of dignified leisure. It was right in there in the political trenches. It's a position of honor, to be sure, but his understanding of the Christian's duty in the world was that you cannot lead a life of perfection. You cannot lead a life of sin-free contemplation. We all are sinners. He becomes more and more the theologian, philosopher who combats perfectionism.

Chapter 5: Perfectability, Sin, and Grace [00:38:23]

Perfectionism is a doctrine that human beings can be made radically better--perfect, even. There are debates throughout societies about the degree of human perfectibility. This is indeed supposedly and to some extent I think really at the heart of debates between what is called liberalism in the United States and conservatism. Liberals believe in human perfectibility. If you educate people, if you help them, if you encourage them, if you provide government subsidies, you will build a better society. The response upon the part of conservatives to that is, people are the way they are because that's the way they want to be, or they made wrong choices. But all the help from some public authority isn't going to help, isn't going to really make a difference.

Are people perfectible? People who believe in education tend to believe that they are. On the other hand, very well-educated people have been bad. Hitler loved classical music. So did Stalin. Just because you are a connoisseur of art doesn't make you a good person.

Augustine is a radical imperfectionist, more so in The City of God than in the Confessions, which is teetering on the brink. The pears is a kind of imperfectionist moment. He glimpses the power of sin. By the time of The City of God, by the time that the end of the Roman Empire is at least glimpsed as a possibility and the rise of the barbarians, Augustine has become someone who does not believe that human beings can, in any way, earn salvation. Human beings are irrevocably sinful.

Once again, if God judged people according to their merits, they would all be damned. Since the Christian belief is that some people are saved, they are saved by a mysterious process called "grace." Grace, by its very meaning, is undeserved. You don't show up at the door of Heaven with a ticket of admission earned by your deeds on Earth. What opens the doors to you is a generous, arbitrary decision. Well, "generous" may mean, I had good intentions. I didn't kill anybody. But "arbitrary" may mean that we can't figure out who's going to Heaven and who's going to Hell. It may even mean that since God knew before we were born, God predestined us for Heaven or Hell.

This is a harsh doctrine. It gets periodically rediscovered and then dropped. It's at the heart of the belief of the people who settled Massachusetts and Connecticut. It is the heart of Calvinism and of Puritanism, the belief in the elect. The question is, are these elect visible or invisible? The elect are people who are going to go to heaven. Are they visible? Can we say, this guy is so good, he's going to heaven? This woman is so loving, nurturing, self-effacing, whatever, she's going to go to heaven? That's the notion of a visible elect. An invisible elect is, "We don't know, we have no idea."

And this is a crucial difference. Because if you believe in the visible elect, even if you say they're not guaranteed, but anybody outside of this circle is for sure going to hell, then you have Puritan New England. You have a small community of people pursuing perfection. Or you have the Amish. Or you have any small pious community that believes that outside of it is more or less given over to sin and more or less doomed. Inside of it, maybe it's not guaranteed, but your chances are much, much better.

But if you believe that we don't have a visible elect, that we have no idea, then everybody ought to be in the Church. Everybody ought to have access to the sacraments that provide initiation into the Church. You ought to start converting pagans, even savage pagans. You ought to be out there roping in as many people into the church, including people who don't want to be. Because you just never know. Maybe their kids will be.

Augustine is behind ideas of things like forced conversion. As long as they're baptized, there's a chance of them being saved. And baptized as infants, preferably, because baptism does not any longer mean, in Augustine's world, perfection. It means the beginning. It means entering the process.

So the three things that he is teaching that are implicit in the Confessions and that he is important for in terms of his intellectual impact are his opposition to perfectionism, his exaltation of grace, and the notion of sin as indelible, not solvable.

Where this becomes of key historical importance is in the Church. The Church is a body that can either be sectarian and small, as with the Amish or Puritan New England, or it can be huge and universal, as with the medieval Catholic Church. Augustine stands behind the medieval Catholic Church, which is a political body, a body of doctrine, a structure ruled by princes, and a structure that has a missionary impact on the rest of the world.

Now, the papers. You have the paper topics. If you didn't get them, come up and see me after. You can choose any one of them, or you can choose something else. But if you choose something else, please talk to your teaching fellow or to me. And talk to us anyway about these papers. We'll give you plenty of opportunity to bounce ideas off us.

Now, next week, we talk about the fall of the Roman Empire. But this is implicit in what we've talked about today, because the bottom line is the Roman Empire is going to fall in the West, and the Church is not going to. And so we'll look at how that works next week. Thanks.

Lecture 6 - Transformation of the Roman Empire [September 19, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction? [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Today we're going to talk about the transformation of the Roman Empire. And I use the somewhat neutral and undramatic word ¡°transformation¡±. It can be ¡°fall of the Roman Empire,¡± ¡°collapse of the Roman Empire. . .¡± It's clear that we're talking about the fall of the Western Empire. Next week we'll talk about the survival of the Eastern Empire.

From 410 to 480, the Western Roman Empire disintegrated. It was dismembered by barbarian groups who were, except for the Huns, not really very barbarian. That is, they were not intent on mayhem and destruction. All they really wanted to do was to be part of the Empire, to share in its wealth and accomplishments, rather than to destroy it.

Nevertheless, 476 is the conventional date for the end of the Western Empire, because in that year, a barbarian chieftain deposed a Roman emperor. Nothing very new about this for the fifth century. What was new is that this chieftain, whose name is spelled all sorts of different ways, but in Wickham, it's Odovacer. Sometimes he's known as Odacaer, Odovacar, Odovacer. We aren't even sure what so-called tribe he belonged to. A barbarian general deposed the child emperor Romulus Augustulus, who by an interesting coincidence, has the names of both the founder of the city of Rome and the founder of the Roman emperor [correction: Empire]. The

¡°-us¡± on the end is little. It's a diminutive. So a man with this grandiose name, a child, deposed in 476.

And instead of imposing another emperor, Odovacer simply wrote to Constantinople and said, ¡°We're going to be loyal to you. We will recognize you as the sole emperor.¡± Constantinople, however, was far away. And while of symbolic significance, this pledge of loyalty by Odovacer had no practical significance. For all intents and purposes, the Western Empire had, in 476, become a collection of barbarian kingdoms.

A kingdom is smaller than an empire. We use the term empire to mean a multi-national, very large state ruled from one center, but consisting of many different kinds of pieces. Kings, and the term and title ¡°king¡±, is of German origin. Kings are very powerful, but over a more limited territory. So there was a king of Italy now. There would be a king of the Franks, or Francia, the former Roman Gaul. There would be a king of the Lombards later in northern Italy. A king of the Visigoths, first in southern France and Spain. And we'll go over who is where at the beginning of next class.

For now, we're going to talk about this collapse and its consequences. And we're going to orient ourselves around three big questions. One-- why did the west fall apart? And as a corollary to that question, was this because of the external pressure of invasions or the internal problems of institutional decline. Did it fall of its own accord or was it pushed, in other words?

Question number two. Or big question number two. Who were these barbarians? And how Romanised or how different from Rome were they? And that's what we're going to talk about more on Wednesday, next class.

And three, does this transformation mark a gradual shift to another civilization, or is it the cataclysmic end of the prevailing form of civilization, ushering in a prolonged period of what used to be called The Dark Ages? The Dark Ages-- roughly the sixth to eleventh century. This is a term we don't like to use. It implies a value judgment that is not only not necessarily accurate, but also expresses a certain kind of point of view of what are good periods in history and what are bad periods in history.

Chapter 2: Catastrophe [00:05:18]

But I'd like to just probe this third question first. That is, how severe a catastrophe was this? So is it the end of civilization ¨¤ la Planet of the Apes or Blade Runner or any of those apocalyptic image we have? Or is it merely a shift in power and the survival of Roman institutions such as the Church, while Roman political infrastructure-- the emperor, the consoles, the praetorian prefects, and so forth-- while that collapses?

A medieval historian named Roger Collins in a book called The Early Middle Ages writes, "The fall of the Roman Empire in the west was not the disappearance of a civilization. It was merely the breakdown of a governmental apparatus that could no longer be sustained." The key word here is ¡°merely¡±. The destruction of the Roman political apparatus may simply mean that the Roman state ceased to function, but that everything else continued.

But really, the question is, could everything else continue in the absence of a state and of a political order? The destruction of the political order also means, after all, the destruction of the military system. When we opened this class, we talked about a civilization built on such things as the rule of law and the maintenance of peace. These are no longer possible if there is no military governmental structure.

As we'll say a little later, to some extent people didn't know that it was the end. Because for a while, things seemed to go on as before. People were speaking Latin, they were living in cities, the cities were much less populated, but nevertheless, they were still there; there were still rich people; there were still poor people. In retrospect, though, we can see that things really did change. How much they changed is the subject of a lot of historical controversy.

The world of the late Roman historians is divided, roughly speaking, between catastrophists and continuists. As you may guess, the catastrophists think the fall of the Roman Empire -- whether we date it 476 or there¡¯s some reasons to date it, really, 550 for reasons we'll learn in next week. Between 450 and 550, a catastrophe happened. A civilization was wiped out. And really, if not literally a Dark Ages, a more primitive, more war-like, more illiterate, and more rural period was ushered in.

The disappearance of ancient texts, things that the Romans knew from that lost Hortensius dialogue of Cicero that Augustine was so fond of to many other kinds of works that had been known to the Roman world, right? I can't remember exactly how many plays Aeschylus wrote, but it's something on the order of 60, and we have three. So the disappearance of text. The end of literacy, except for a very small portion of the Christian clergy.

A more primitive architecture. The end of grand civic projects like aqueducts, coliseums, theaters, baths. A more isolated society without these urban centers. A diminished population spread across the countryside, mostly engaged in subsistence. Hence, the, if not end of trade, the radical diminution of trade.

The continuists, people like Collins whom I just quoted, see the political changes as dramatic all right, but as essentially surface phenomena based partly on archaeology and partly on a more sympathetic understanding of Christian practices. In other words, they don't think that the proliferation of churches, saints, cults, is necessarily a sign of primitiveness. So based on both archaeology and an understanding of Christianity, these continuists point to the survival of trade, the role of bishops and other church officials, as replacing the Roman governors.

The Roman political order may have collapsed in terms of staffing by lay people and military people, but the bishops were now the rulers of the city. The bishops would now do things like ensure the food supply, rally the local population against barbarian invasions, educate the populace. And the barbarian kings themselves try, with some success, to perpetuate the Roman order. They collect taxes, for example-- that may or may not be a good thing. They engage in some kind of public works, some kind of maintenance of order.

The civilization of the sixth and seventh centuries in what comes to be considered Western Europe, rather than the Western Roman Empire, is not radically more barbarized or primitive than the late Roman Empire. Thus, the continuists.

My own position, but I don't hold to it dogmatically, is that of a moderate catastrophist. I think something really happened; I think it's pretty radical; and it didn't happen all at once, however. 476 is not the year of collapse. It is a process. I'm fascinated by the degree to which people were and were not aware of the cataclysm, but I believe there is a cataclysm.

Wickham, the author of this book that we're starting now The Inheritance of Rome, Chris Wickham, straddles the fence, as you've seen. His chapter that you were to read for today is entitled, ¡°Crisis and Continuity: 400 to 550¡±. I would never use a chapter title like that, because it's really frustrating. Which is it, dude?

He's the leading medieval historian in the English-speaking world. He is Chichele Professor at All Souls, Oxford. And if that doesn't sound impressive, well, it takes a lot to impress you. He's a very great historian, but I don't like that chapter title. As I said, I would emphasize crisis or change or cataclysm.

Well, let's ask what happened, beginning with the gradual involvement of the barbarians in the military and their entrance into the empire. We're using the term ¡°barbarians¡±, which goes back to the Greek term applied to outsiders. People outside but threatening. The Greeks defined barbarians as uncivilized by reason of their speech, which sounded to them incoherent, and by reason of the fact that they're nomads.

People who lead settled lives don't trust nomads. Nomads, almost extinct in our world, once dominated many geographical regions and were frightening, because they moved to around to people who liked order and familiarity. They didn't live in cities, whether they were nomadic or not. Barbarians were illiterate. This is the Greek idea of barbarians.

In the case of Rome, there is no single definition of barbarian society. We can say that Rome was overthrown by a war-like, but not very fierce, group of enemies. And I use enemies in a very mild sense. The Romans perceived them as enemies; the barbarians perceived Rome as simply a nicer place to live.

But there is no Mongol horde kind of event here. They're not that frightening. The Romans had known them for centuries. Most of them were even Christians. Heretical Christians, OK. They're Arians, A-R-I-A-N-S, I remind you, but they're not unfamiliar, again, even in their religion. They've been at the borders of the Roman empire forever.

Like most empires, Rome was at the one hand, very aggressive, and on the other hand thought of itself is peace-loving. It maintained the Danube-Rhine frontier as a kind of natural frontier, every so often crossing those rivers to punish German tribes who were probing the frontiers of the empire. But generally speaking, the Romans were not interested in what they perceived, somewhat inaccurately, as endless forests inhabited by primitive people.

The continuists argue, with some justice, that between 250 and 600 what changed was not that primitive warriors conquered a civilized state, in the way that say, the Mongols conquered China in the thirteenth century ?but that the ancient world became the medieval world. That is, an urban culture became more rural. A Latin culture became amalgamated to a German one. Pagan society became Christian.

Having said this, it's nevertheless true that the most dramatic event to the fifth century is that people who had been outside the empire were now in it. If we ask why the Western Empire collapsed, the simple, most immediate answer is it was taken over by German confederations, tribes. They came not so much as conquerors as military recruits, or as allies, or as refugees.

So rather than as guys with knives in their teeth hacking and slashing and burning, they came as pathetic refugees, maybe doing some hacking, slashing, and burning; as military recruits; and as military allies. Again, not without a certain amount of H. S. B.: (hacking and slashing and burning). But not a cataclysmic amount. They admired Rome. They wanted to continue its institutions. They regarded Rome as a rich and as civilized. The last thing they wanted was to still live in little huts in the forest.

They were not the bringers of a revolution. They were not even that numerous, amounting to some tens of thousands. Nevertheless, they ended Roman government, accelerated the changes we've already described towards depopulation, decentralization, ruralization-- a less cultivated, less literate, less Mediterranean-centered society.

Chapter 3: The Roman Army and the Visigoths [00:18:18]

So I want to begin the description of this process by the changes in the Roman army. We saw that Diocletian, around 300 AD, militarizes Roman government, pays for the, perhaps, doubling of the military presence of the Roman army by changing the taxation system. So the twin pillars of the empire in the fourth century are army and taxation, the latter requiring a civilian governmental apparatus.

The army was a problem in terms of the recruiting of soldiers. This may have to do with the population; it may have to do with the unattractive nature of military life, but nevertheless there was already, in the fourth century, a tendency to get the more familiar barbarians into the army as Roman soldiers. Because they were available, they were near the frontiers-- this may seem odd. Why hire your potential enemy to be soldiers? But there's a lot of precedent.

Very often, empires don't really want to supply their own manpower. And the people who are the best soldiers are also the people who may, in the future, be most threatening. I don't want to pursue this simile, but the Afghan Mujahideen were trained by Americans, because at one time they were opposed to the Russian occupation of Afghanistan. As it happened, in retrospect, that had some bad consequences. But at the time, it seemed like a good idea.

So in the 370s a group called the Visigoths asks to be admitted to the Roman Empire as an allied army. In other words, the whole group will be federated with the Romans. And federati is the term given for barbarian troops serving under the Roman Empire.

Why were they on the move? These are not really nomadic people. They don't live in yurts or travel across Central Asia. They tend to be settled in villages. They have dairy cattle rather than have some kind of nomadic sheep, or something like. They're pretty settled. Nevertheless, in 378, they were on the move. And we don't know why. Some enemy pushing them across the Danube into what's now Romania? It may be the weakness of the Empire. They may have seen that the empire was not so strong and made a proposition, kind of like a takeover. You don't seem to be doing so well in your stock or your finances, so we're going to infuse some capital into you, i.e., our soldiers.

They also may have been hungry. Certainly, once they crossed the frontier, the Romans were rather inept in feeding them, in supplying them, and the Visigoths rebelled. Thus far, nothing incredibly new. What really was new was that the emperor came with an army to suppress them. And rather to his surprise and everybody else's, the emperor Valens was defeated at the battle of Adrianopole. Defeated by the barbarians. Yeah.

Student: So, being involved in this federati, what did they get from the Roman Empire? Did they agree to fight for them and then they'd get land?

Professor Paul Freedman: They agreed to fight for them and they got a combination of land, or supposed to get land or territory, and some kind of maintenance in kind and or money. The question was about what the Visigoths, as federati, got out of this deal. Or were supposed to get.

The defeat at Valens was not immediately cataclysmic, because, even though he was killed at this battle, even though it sent shock waves throughout the empire, in fact, it would not be this area that succumbed to the barbarians-- the East. Romania, or the Balkans would be part of the Eastern Empire. And indeed, both Adrianople the city, and Constantinople, the even greater city, would withstand Visigothic attempts to take them.

?In 382, the Visigoths were officially recognized, and they were allowed to settle in the Balkans as federati. And, in fact, they were reasonably useful troops to the Roman Empire in the 380s and 390s. What this does show, however, is the barbarization of the army. And another aspect of that is that the army tended to be commanded now more and more by barbarian generals.

These barbarian generals, at the top, bore the title magister militum ¨C master of the soldiers. So I'm using the term ¡°general¡± as an anachronistic one, since that's what we're familiar with. These magistri were powerful leaders, charismatic leaders, of German or other tribal groups, who then ruled in the name of, or behind the throne of the emperor. They couldn't be emperors themselves, at least in these years, it was impossible to envisage a barbarian emperor. But they held more power than the emperors.

Two of these generals, war leaders, magistri, Stilicho and Alaric. Stilicho was a Vandal. Alaric was a Visigoth. Alaric wanted territory, food, treasure from Rome. The Visigoths were moving from the Balkans into Greece, eventually into Italy. Stilicho played a kind of game with Alaric, trying to keep him in check in the name of the Western emperor, but also negotiating with him. The emperors moved from Milan in the north to Ravenna, a little bit to the east. Ravenna, then, was in the marshes and impossible for a barbarian army to take. This is the last capital of the Western Roman Empire. Kind of romantic and mysterious, but strange as a place to end up.

These are the Visigoths then, who are on the move in the 390s and the 400s. Eventually, Stilicho would be executed by the Roman emperor of the West, and Alaric would invade and plunder Rome in 410. It was the Visigoths who engineered the so-called Sack of Rome that so shocked Augustine and his contemporaries.

Where, you might be asking in all of this, was the Roman army? Alaric was wandering around the Balkans and Italy for two decades before he sacked Rome. The army, which had consumed so much of the resources of the Roman Empire, is curiously absent in the history of the fifth century. This is not the Eastern Front in World War II. This is something altogether different: the collapse of an empire that expended huge amounts of treasure on its army. Its army seems to be invisible and supports, to some extent -- or that fact supports to some extent, the argument that the Roman Empire collapsed of its own internal disorders, since we don't see it losing pitched battles to outside barbarians.

Or maybe the army doesn't disappear, it becomes indistinguishable from the invaders. The army is the invaders. Creepier.

Chapter 4: Another Kind of Barbarian: The Huns [00:28:00]

Now within this, there are some real barbarians-- the Huns. The Huns are kind of nomadic. OK, they didn't actually cook their meat by holding it between their thigh and the horse hide, and the sweat and heat of the horse heated up the meat. This is a widespread myth of nomadic peoples. The Chinese say this about the Mongols, the Romans about Huns. But they were pretty mean.

They were interested in the Roman Empire mostly for plunder. And they didn't care if that destroyed the economic base, because they weren't thinking in such terms. And indeed, they may have frightened the rather nice German tribes that stood between them and the Roman Empire.

In the 450s the Huns were united under the leadership of Attila. And Attila certainly threatened the Eastern Empire first, but the Eastern emperor defeated the Huns, discontinued tribute to them, and in a pattern that we'll see repeated again and again, the Huns decided that Constantinople was too tough. That the Eastern Empire as a whole, access to which was more or less controlled by Constantinople, was too well-guarded.

And they turned to the west instead. Not as rich maybe, but much easier pickings. They show up in Gaul in 450. They were defeated by an army of Visigoths allied with Romans. They then went to Italy. They went into the heart of the Empire, sacked cities in the northeast of Italy, and there's no army. The emperor is holed up in Ravenna. basically shuts the door, gets under the bed, and waits for it to go away.

The one power of Italy willing to try to deal with Attila is the Bishop of Rome, whom we haven't heard of yet, but we're going to be hearing about him a lot. And indeed, in the course that follows this, even more. The Bishop of Rome ¨C the pope. Pope Leo I, along with two senators from the Roman senate, goes up to northern Italy to remonstrate with Attila, to visit the leader of this barbarian tribe in 453 to try to get him to stop plundering Italy.

Whether they were successful or not doesn't much matter, because Attila died shortly thereafter of a brain hemorrhage. And with his charismatic leadership, the Huns came to an end as a military force. That is, with the end of his leadership, the Huns no longer had as imposing a military force and quickly disintegrated.

What's significant is that it's the pope who is taking over what we would think of as the Roman imperial responsibilities. And this will be a pattern, not only in the assertion of papal power, but in the way in which the Church starts to take over many of the roles abandoned by the empire.

After this, the barbarian generals, in effect, take charge. The Huns are defeated, but the other groups now pour into the empire. The Vandals have taken over North Africa by this time, by 430, cutting off the grain supply to Rome. They are unusual among the barbarian groups in that they have a navy. They know how to use boats, and indeed, they plunder the city of Rome in 455 in a sack that might have been worse than that of 410.

By 470, the Visigoths control southern Gaul, what's now southern France; a group called the Suevi are in Spain; the Vandals in North Africa; a group called the Ostrogoths in what's now Hungary; the Angles and the Saxons in Britain. All that effectively remained of the Western empire when Odovacer overthrew Romulus Augustulus was Italy. And in 476, that's it.

A little coda, however. In 493, the Eastern emperor in Constantinople convinced the Ostrogoths to get out of Hungary, stop threatening the Eastern Empire, and take Italy from Odovacer. Once again, the Eastern Empire is capable of deflecting barbarians into the west, because they're too strong. So in 493, our friend Odovacer was overthrown by the Ostrogoths and their leader Theoderic.

Chapter 5: Accomodation [00:33:54]

So what's the impact of all of this? On the ground, if you were looking around in 480s, 490s, you would see a kind of accommodation. The Roman elite accommodated themselves to, compromised with, negotiated with, their new rulers. So, for example, a member of a very wealthy Roman family, a man named Sidonius Apollinaris in southern France, was a bishop and a great landowner. And we have a lot of letters of his that tell us about his negotiations with the Visigothic king Euric. He found the Visigoths uncouth, hard to deal with, not knowledgeable of the Latin classics, but not very frightening, either. Not particularly formidable.

So accommodation, improvisation. We have a saint's life that is a biography of a saint, a man named-- I'm sorry that I'm writing on the board so much today. Usually, as you know, I'm a little more in control. But these are great names. And some of them are good cats names or dog names, too. Severinus of Noricum. You know, ¡°Stop scratching the furniture, Severinus.¡± That kind of thing. Severinus of Noricum. A saint in what's now, more or less, Austria. His life tells us that he learned of the end of the Roman Empire this way:

"At the time when the Roman Empire was still in existence, the soldiers of many towns were supported by public money to guard the frontier. When this arrangement ceased, the military formations were dissolved, and the frontier vanished. The garrison of Passau, which is still a town in modern Bavaria, the garrison of Passau, however, still held out. Some of the men had gone to Italy to fetch for their comrades their last payment."

This resembles a corporation-- somebody, actually, was telling me yesterday they worked for Eastern Airlines, a company that went out of business in 1990. And so sudden was the collapse of Eastern, even though it had been predicted, that she was a flight attendant and had to get on another airline in order to get home. She lived in New York; she was in Florida; Eastern ceased to exist. So these soldiers are in the same position. They want to get their last paycheck.

They were never heard from again. Nobody knew that they, in fact, were killed by barbarians on the way. "One day, when Saint Severinus was reading in his cell, he suddenly closed the book and began to sigh. The river, he said, was now red with human blood. At that moment the news arrived that the soldiers had been washed ashore by the current.¡±

Interestingly enough, he doesn't just stay in his cell and pray. He starts to organize this society. He is active, although some of it involves some miracles, in poor relief. He deals with the local barbarian king, the king of the Alamanni, remonstrates with him.

He helps in diverting Odovacer into Italy. Again, like Pope Leo, we have a member of the church, and in this case somebody that you would think was a recluse, indeed had been living like a recluse, nevertheless taking over the responsibilities for a population abandoned by its civilian government. That is then one of the forms of accommodation.

Chapter 6: Decline [00:38:55]

Another aspect of this era, however, is decline. The urban population declines. The society and economy experienced what Wickham euphemistically calls, ¡°a radical material simplification¡±. The term he uses, I believe, on page 95 and 105. ¡°Radical material simplification¡± means that your standard of living plummets.

Cruder ceramics. Instead of that nice, north African red slip ware, you've got mud that you baked at home. Fewer imports, no pepper. More homemade, crude building materials. Fewer luxury goods.

The Vandal control of North Africa meant the end of the Roman wheat supply. The countryside of Rome had not grown enough wheat to feed the city since 200 BC. So for 600 years, minimum, Rome was dependent on other sources of supply. Southern Italy, Sicily, North Africa. The moment the Vandals cut the supply, the city could no longer support its massive population, could not feed everybody. When you multiply this phenomenon, it's not a surprise that the city's decline in population, and that the society becomes more rural, more agricultural, more subsistent.

And here's where I think Collins is naive to speak of merely a political decline. Without a government and military structure, trade could not take place on the scale it had before. And without that trade, cities could not survive. There is no denying a decline in culture, economy, and population. Let's just look at Roman population figures, based on things like pork supply figures, public-- well, I mean, nobody took a census in Rome. We don't really know exactly how many people lived there at any given time.

But historians and archaeologists looking at things like food supply, public welfare payments, water delivery figures, for aqueducts, and the abandonment of houses and of building sites. Probably in 5 BC, the Roman population was 800,000. That would be a fairly conservative estimate. Maybe as much as a million, but definitely 800,000. 5 BC. Yeah?

Student: This is just the city of Rome?

Professor Paul Freedman: Just the city of Rome. Yes, just the city of Rome. At the time of Constantine, sort of where we begin the course, more or less, in the early fourth century, the population had declined probably to 600,000. After the sack of Rome in 419, probably 300,000 to 500,000. Obviously, these are very rough figures.

But after the sack of Rome, more than half of the population that had existed in 5 BC is gone. With the end of grain shipments from North Africa, we don't really know immediately. We can estimate that by 590, there could not have been more than 150,000 people in Rome. This is after not only the Vandals, but after a catastrophic war in Italy launched by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian, who we'll be talking about next week.

In 800, on Christmas Day, Charlemagne was crowned in Saint Peter's in Rome as Roman Emperor by the pope, an act whose implications we will be exploring towards the end of the class. On that day, Rome must've had maximum, maximum, most optimistic estimate, 30,000 people. This does not necessarily mean that they were primitive, but they were living in the Coliseum, for example. People built houses in there. They used the walls of the Coliseum as a fort. There is a certain Planet of the Apes quality, in fact. Rome, still to this day, is filled with picturesque ruins, even though it is a city of two and a half, three million people.

As I said, people were not necessarily aware of this change. For example, lots of churches were built at this time, and some of them have mosaic pavements that have mottos about the grandeur of the Roman name, and the usual classical kind of mottos. But then again, people often aren't aware of what's happening to them. I mean, what if somebody in the future points to the fact that New Haven, in 1920, had far more people living in it than it does now? New Haven lost a third of its population between 1950 and 1980.

What if some future historian is scandalized at the fact that in order to get into Yale a hundred years ago you had to know Greek and Latin. If you look at what those gentlemen C students had to study, or were responsible for, in say, 1925, it's extraordinary. It's not very impressive in the sciences, but the decline of the humanities, if by decline we mean things like knowledge of classical literature, is stunning.

Somebody may decide in a few hundred years that the Dark Ages began in about 1950. And that those pathetic people in, say, 2011 impressed with their little technological toys, nonetheless didn't know anything. Now I don't actually believe that. There are some people who do. There's a philosopher at Notre Dame named Alasdair MacIntyre who really believes that the Dark Ages began a long time ago, and we simply don't know. We simply refuse to recognize this.

I was impressed by an obituary for a man named Patrick Leigh Fermor, who died at the age of 96 earlier this year. This is the last of the great British characters of the twentieth century. He not only was classically trained, wrote a lot about Greece, lived in Greece, he, in World World II, disguised himself as a Greek shepherd in Crete, engineered the capture of a German general, and the delivery of that general after three weeks of hiking through the mountains of Crete to a British destroyer. It's in a movie called Ill Met By Moonlight, if you ever want to check this out. Not a great movie, but¡ª

Patrick Leigh Fermor also wrote two books out of a projected three about walking from Holland to Constantinople or, Baghdad actually, I think, in the 1930s. But the obituary describes a conversation he had with this German general, whom he is trying to get across Crete. And the general at one point, over some fire in the wilderness, quotes a line from Horace, the Roman poet, that then Patrick Leigh Fermor finishes is for him, and indeed, quotes the next two stanzas.

Well, that world is over. That world is over. I don't pretend to be part of that world, either. And that's a world that would have existed in the time of Horace, or the years after Horace, who lives at the time of Augustus. This would have existed in 300 A D. It would have existed, at least, in a few monasteries in 800 AD. It would have flourished in the Britain of the eighteenth and nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

So again, I don't think that civilization came to an end. What came to an end was a civilization, a certain kind of society. It has some heirs, however, like all dead entities. There are four heirs to the Roman Empire. One is the Byzantine Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire, which calls itself the Roman Empire. It doesn't call itself the Eastern, doesn't call itself the Byzantine, it calls itself the Roman Empire, even though it does so in Greek.

The second heir are the barbarian kings. We'll be talking about them on Wednesday. They are attempting to prop up the remnants of Roman culture, civilization, and material society.

The third heir in some ways, is Islam, which we meet in the seventh century, the century of its invention. And the fourth heir is the Church. Even though the Church grew up in opposition to the Roman Empire, it will preserve Latin, cities, learning, classical civilization. OK. So barbarians on Wednesday.

Lecture 7 - Barbarian Kingdoms [September 21, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: So last time we spoke about the collapse of the Roman Empire. And I didn't quite definitively answer the question: External force - Internal collapse? There are other possible explanations: an eminent historian of the barbarians says that the Roman Empire committed suicide by accident. That essentially it was just a political problem. The wrong people became emperors. Some bad things happened and one day there it was, it was gone. I'm not sure I buy that; I like long-term causes more.

But it is important to emphasize that a lot of this is contingency and not inevitability. Historians generally tend to make things look as if they had to happen. As if there's sort of long-term things playing out inevitably. And the longer or the farther away the historian is from the period that he or she is studying, the greater that tendency because the look back is longer.

So in talking about both the Empire and the barbarians, I want to at least remind you that events could have gone other ways. There are lots of long-term tendencies, but we're talking about a series of factors that are both immediate and long term. This is relevant to talking about the barbarians and who they are. Which is more of a mystery than it might seem. Who they are as in, what does it mean to say that someone is a Visigoth? How much have I described what that means? And despite the business about plunder, that's not actually the only thing they were after.

As we have tried to emphasize, they liked the Roman Empire. They wanted to share in its advantages, not to destroy it. We've emphasized accommodation rather than conquest. We've said that this is the end of a world, not the end of the world. It is the end of a certain civilization, perhaps, or maybe transformation of that civilization, but it's not the end of civilization. They're not invaders from outer space.

Where do they come from? Who are they? What are these aspects of accommodation? That's partly what we want to talk about today in discussing the barbarian kingdoms after the collapse of Rome.

So 476 to 530. What happens in 530 is that the Eastern Roman Empire embarks on a reconquest of the West under the emperor Justinian. And that will be the subject of our discussion a week from today. Any questions in the meanwhile?

Notice that in the Burgundian Code the authors of the code, the Burgundians, call themselves barbarians. They distinguish between barbarians and Romans. Even though they use the word, it's deceptive to think of barbarians, or tribes, or Germans as if these were absolute well-defined terms that corresponded to an absolute well-defined set of realities.

What do we know about these people before they enter the Empire? We know something from archaeology. But as they moved around, as I said they're not nomadic, they have settlements, but they're not very urban settlements. They have gravesites. People who have gravesites with a lot of graves are not moving around a lot. So that's one indication. And the gravesites sometimes have stuff in them, things buried with them. And among other things, they show that they had trade with the Roman Empire because they've got Roman artifacts in them.

?

Chapter 2: Tacitus and the Nature of the Barbarian Tribes [00:04:23]

Well, OK. But we actually don't find out that much about them. The main written source for pre-invasion, let's call them Germanic tribes delicately, is Tacitus, the Roman historian better known, or best known, for his very pessimistic annals of the history of the Roman Empire. But also the author of a brief work called Germania about the German tribes.

For Tacitus, the Germans - that is the peoples living beyond the Rhine frontier - are both childlike and noble. They're warlike. From the Roman point of view, these barbarians are intent on invading the Empire and enjoying its riches. Hence the defensive kinds of frontiers we've talked about. The Rhine, or in Britain, Hadrian's Wall, which you can still see in the north of England, not that far from the Scottish border. That to guard not against Germans, but Celts, Picts, and Scots, in particular.

Tacitus portrays the Germans as kind of warlike. Around the year 100 is his description. But he never visited Germania. And if you'd asked him, well, if you're going to write about them, shouldn't you do some field work? he'd have looked at you as if you were crazy. Go there? Me? Moi? You've got to be kidding.

The reason he wrote the work was probably not an anthropological description of the Germans, but as a way of berating the Romans. If you describe people who are virtuous but primitive, you can use that to castigate your own people. Rousseau's noble savage where the American Indians are used to attack supposedly civilized societies is an example. Or descriptions of the South Seas, some of Herman Melville's earlier works. Or Robert Louis Stevenson. Or Gauguin's paintings. Contrast a beautiful, natural, simple world far superior to the fatiguing rat race of what passes for civilization.

So Tacitus' Germans are warlike, concerned with personal bravery and honor. They have close family ties. They're heterosexuals. They treat their women well. All of these are supposed to contrast with what Tacitus, who's a bit of a scold, Tacitus sees as Roman decadence.

The Romans are given to prostitution. None of that in the German realms. The Romans are given to same sex love. Oh, no, no, no. The Germans know that that is really evil. They don't practice divorce, according to Tacitus. Now this is not-- This is a moralistic rather than an ethnographic treatise.

He does condemn them for certain vices. The vices typically ascribed to so-called primitive peoples by the civilized. They're lazy. They tend to get drunk. They quarrel. They gamble.

In several respects Tacitus, however, describes things that are true of later German practices visible in the Burgundian Code, for example. And that he does not make up for any particular moralistic purpose. Two of these things are the comitatus-- The comitatus is the important men surrounding the leader, his entourage, but his military entourage, his armed men. Not just bodyguards, but members of a gang, I guess would be the closest simile. People who are loyal to their superior, but who have a certain amount of autonomy. They're not just sort of paid, as I said, bodyguards. They are his followers. An anachronistic word would be ¡°vassals¡±¨Canachronistic because it's not used at this time. His military followers. Armed military followers, the comitatus.

Tacitus describes the feud. Feud between clans. Feuds are generally characteristic of societies without a strong central government and with fairly generous definitions of kinship. A generous definition of kinship means you know who your second cousin is, maybe your third cousin, maybe your third cousin twice removed. And that cousin is going to consider your interests to be his or her interests as well.

You might expect your children or parents to support you, but you probably don't expect your great uncles or second cousins to do much for you. So in terms of vengeance, which is also protection, in other words, I am protected by the fact that if somebody kills me, my clan will take vengeance on their clan. In terms of protection and vengeance, extended kinship is related to a feud and to keeping order in a society that doesn't have a very powerful central government.

One way of avoiding feuds that killed too many people is compensation. And this compensation is mentioned by Tacitus and is what appears in the Burgundian Code and elsewhere as wergeld. Wergeld is the money paid in compensation for hurting or killing someone. I killed your brother. We have a drunken brawl. I don't like the way he describes my mother. And I kill him. I'm sorry, but that's just the way things go. What are you going to do about it? Are you going to kill me? Are you going to kill a cousin of mine? Or maybe you'll accept compensation based on, say, what kind of guy he was. Was he a silversmith? In which case I'm going to have to pay a huge amount of money. Or was he just some guy? Some random guy, random Burgundian? Or free Burgundian? Or freed, formerly slave? All of these are tariffs. They're sliding scales of compensation. Tacitus mentions this.

So we're looking at the Burgundian Code ¨C and there are other barbarian law codes ¨C for clues as to how the society functioned. But of course, it's a society that's already in the Roman Empire. It looks like before they entered the empire, they lived in little villages. They cultivated grain, but they were more cattle-raisers. They're skilled at iron working. They also supplemented their income by a spot of raiding and warfare. Opportunistic warfare.

Ties of kinship are very important. When we're talking about a clan, extended kinship group, we're talking about maybe 50 households. And we'll see this again. We'll see this with the Bedouins in the desert, for example. Within the clan you're not supposed to feud. Not supposed to. Above the clan level is some kind of confederation or tribe. And this is where things get kind of difficult, because we don't really know how one clan considered another clan to be part of something larger. That is, we know that the Romans call the people who defeated them at Adrianople the Visigoths. ¡°Oh, my gosh. Here I am. Adrianople. The Visigoths are winning. What am I going to do?¡±

But who are the Visigoths? One theory is that they're just groups of people who come together in contact with the Roman Empire, in part because the Roman Empire calls them something. It gives them a name and they develop what's called ¡°fictive kinship¡± from a common ancestor. They invent the notion that they all come from one place and one ancestor.

This process of sort of fictitious ethnic invention is called ¡°ethnogenesis¡±. Ethnogenesis means the birth of an ethnicity. Rather than some kind of biological fact that you could confirm with DNA, e.g. all Visigoths have some sort of biological thing in common. These people are not really related, but they invent a common ancestor.

And this question of who forms a real group remains both important as a real thing. For example, American Indian tribes. There are some whose claims to existence are indisputable. They have treaties with the United States. They've had reservations for many years. But now with the inducements for tribes, the tax free status, the ability to have casinos and things like that, there are petitions for tribes to be recognized as such. And here the question of ethnicity. Ethnic identification becomes extremely important.

A more sinister and much more widespread modern aspect of ethnogenesis is precisely the use of the Germanic barbarians as the origins of the Germans. It's no accident that in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, culminating but not limited to the Nazis, the idea of the Germans as a racial group; as a group with a common Aryan ¨C? with a ¡°y¡± ¨C ancestry; As manly and as pure in the sense that Tacitus portrays them becomes a polemical idea. A fighting idea. An invented idea of great force. Just because something is false, it does not necessarily lack historical importance. So the idea of ethnogenesis, of the invention of a group called the Visigoths is one way of approaching who they are.

On the other hand, there's not a whole lot of evidence that they're doing this. There's not a whole lot of evidence that they are developing this notion of a common ancestor. Much of the evidence, or seeming evidence, for that is Roman. A lot of this ethnogenesis comes from contact with the Romans. Certainly peoples who come in contact with those who are more civilized than they are, and by civilized I mean peoples who have writing, who live in cities, who have extensive trade and administration. The so-called barbarian peoples are going to want to define themselves against the Romans. Hence, among other things, many of these invaders are Arian, with an ¡°i¡±. They use religious difference as part of their identity.

So they have come into the empire and, as we said last time, they come into the empire first as allied troops, as refugees, as federati. Federati, that is to say armies of the Roman Empire. They are supported by a system with the bland name of hospitality. Hospitality meaning that they're settled on the land of Romans and they share in the revenue of that land. That's how the Romans pay them. They don't pay them cash. They don't pay them in plunder. They pay them in a portion of the tax revenue.

So you owe a reasonably powerful but not quite powerful enough senator in Burgandy. You settle some friendly Burgundian troops on your land. And you give them hospitality, that is to say one third of the tax revenue that you're collecting for the empire. Or maybe one third? of just your regular old private revenues.

This is a kind of accommodation then. It's accommodation that costs money, but it is part of a set of ways that the Roman elite figures out how to deal with these invaders. Collaborate with them.

So the Roman aristocratic land owners and the barbarian war leaders come to various kinds of accommodation. Now, the accommodation differs depending on where we're speaking of. And now we come to the point of having to describe the barbarian kingdoms.

?

Chapter 3: The Barbardian Kingdoms [00:20:05]

I've given you two maps, one of which you're not to show people who are not in the class. This one. The one with the arrows. Yale University is home to one of the great historians of our time, Walter Goffart. And I can't believe that I'm talking about all sorts of people like Wickham and Goffart in something that's going to be widely available, but, anyway let me express my admiration to him, great early Medieval historian who could certainly run rings around me. He's retired. He taught at the University of Toronto. And among his many works is one that completely destroys the notion of having invaders with arrows. This whole idea, like they've got this path; we know where they are; they come from somewhere.

See up where what is now southern Sweden, Skandia? A lot of these histories, or what purport to be histories, say they came from Skandia. And you can still read in not very old textbooks, oh, the Visigoths came from Skandia. And then they went here, and then they went there, and they're migrating all round. And you have little arrows that show their progress. You're not supposed to do that. I'm not sure what you're supposed to do though, as a substitute. And as always with historically misleading things, once you get rid of the misleading thing, you're kind of helpless if you're trying to teach this.

So I'm asking you to look at this really closely and not take it seriously. I'm asking you to memorize everywhere they went, but not to tell anybody. Once they enter the Empire then those arrows start to make sense. We know that the Visigoths were in the Balkans at the time of the battle of Adrianople in 278.(correction: 378) We know that they sacked Rome in 410. We know that they go down to Italy to try to get to the granaries of North Africa. We know they discover, ¡°OMG, I can't build a boat,¡± so then they come up the other side of Italy. They settle in southern France. They're kicked out of southern France by the Franks for the most part. And they settle in Spain, where the Arabs get them. Four weeks from now, I think.

So the arrows are not completely deceptive, and that's why I've given these to you. And it's hard to tell which arrows apply to which tribes, so hence map two. Map two, a lot calmer. This is the situation in 506. Why 506? Because in that year the Franks, whom we're going to be following more closely, the Merovingian Franks defeat the Visigoths and start pushing them out of southern France. So this is a map, I guess, before that defeat. You see the Visigoths in southern France and northeastern Spain with the Basques kind of in between them.

So this is the situation in 500. There's no more Roman Empire of the West. Or there is a fictitious Roman Empire of the West. All of these people to varying degrees-- well, not all of them, most of them-- acknowledge some kind of suzerainty of Constantinople. You'll read about Clovis, King of the Franks in the beginning of the 6th century, who gets some sort of gift from the emperor Anastasius in Constantinople. A letter of appointment, some robes, various trinkets, and, according to Gregory of Tours, the historian of Clovis, the title of consul. And he is very pleased with this. He dons these robes. He scatters coins just like a newly appointed emperor.

But is he obeying the emperor Anastasius? Did the emperor Anastasius start sending orders to him? Or have any kind of administration? No. This is really just symbolic. We will talk about the relationship between the Eastern empire and the barbarians, because it's going to change in the sixth century as the Eastern empire fends off its opponents and becomes more concerned to take back as much as possible of the lost Western empire.

In the year 500, the most impressive of these barbarians would've been the Ostrogoths because they are occupying Italy, which is the most Roman, the most prosperous, the most intact economically and culturally of the former Roman Empire of the West.

The Ostrogoths had been in the-- if you look at the arrows, they had been maybe in the Crimean area, around the Black Sea. They came into the Balkans. They tried to attack Constantinople in the late fifth century, and they were defeated. And they were encouraged to move into Italy by the Byzantine emperor to get rid of Odoacer, that military leader whose takeover of Italy in 476 is conventionally understood to be the end of the Roman Empire in the West.

The Ostrogoths had an impressive ruler named Theodoric. And they ruled from Ravenna, the old last Roman capital in northeastern Italy. And the tomb of Theodoric can still be seen in Ravenna. Very impressive monument.

?

Chapter 4: Intellectual Life after the Fall of Rome [00:26:17]

Roman education survived in Italy. It would reach its last flowering with two figures: I mentioned one of them last time, Boethius, and Cassiodorus. These are two key figures in the preservation of classical learning. Boethuis, not perhaps literally the last person in the west who knew Greek, but certainly the last person who tried to make Greek knowledge known to people who could only read in Latin. He conceived the project of translating all of Plato and Aristotle into Latin. He started by doing a kind of introductory textbook. Like a lot of great projects, this one was not completed. In fact, this one barely got off the ground because he was accused by Theodoric of conspiring with the Byzantine Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire, to overthrow him.

He was imprisoned for a year. In prison he wrote one of the most magnificent works of philosophy, of why we are alive and why we die. The Consolation of Philosophy. And then he was executed.

Cassiodorus lived to be ninety. So one of the differences between these two figures of the last gasp of Roman culture in Italy is Cassiodorus's relative longevity. They're both figures of the sixth century. Boethius dies in the 530s, Cassiodorus much, much later. Cassiodorus also conceives of a program of education, but it is more oriented towards Latin learning. And Cassiodorus in some way is the founder, or at least the transmitter to us, of the idea of the liberal arts.

Cassiodorus is a religious figure. Boethius is a Christian and he wrote on Christian topics, but The Consolation of Philosophy, interestingly enough, is a Stoical work, has very little explicitly about Christianity.

Cassiodorus, on the other hand, is the guy who invented the idea that monks should copy manuscripts. That the preserve of culture, the place where it seeks refuge and is protected in barbarian times, should be monasteries. This seems so self-evident to us. Because if there's one thing we know about monasteries, it's guys hunched over and writing stuff and the preservation of learning. But, in fact, monasteries start out as just anti-intellectual institutions where you pray and you don't spend a lot of time reading, let alone copying, let alone thinking. You're supposed to have visions. You're supposed to be inspired. You're supposed to fast and become ecstatic. It's Cassiodorus who conceives of this as a contemplative and learned project.

The liberal arts means here things that are not immediately practically useful, but that help illuminate the person seeking after knowledge. And what kind of knowledge is a person seeking after in the 6th century A.D.? They're seeking after knowledge of God and knowledge of the divine.

Why not just read the Bible? I'm sure many of you have read the Bible or read parts of it. The Bible is not an immediately evident document in terms of its view of the world is total, but it's full of mysteries. It's full of obscurities. It's a strange work that requires knowledge and explication. Or to celebrate divine services, for example, requires a certain kind of knowledge. To know when Easter is. To know the phases of the moon. To know what day it is. These monks, or just anybody out in the countryside, can't just look at their phone and see what time it is.

There's a need for some practical knowledge, but that involves abstract concepts like the movements of the planets. This is what the liberal arts are and this is what's being preserved in the Ostrogothic kingdom. But the fate of Boethius shows you the sort of duality of the barbarian patronage of culture. On the one hand, the Ostrogoths in Italy are as civilized as these groups get. On the other hand, of course, Boethius is executed. On the third hand, you didn't have to be a barbarian to execute people. After all, Seneca was forced to commit suicide by Nero. So the fate of intellectuals in the Roman Empire is not necessarily so much better than the fate of intellectuals in the barbarian kingdoms.

The thing about the intellectuals in the barbarian kingdoms is they're very few of them. Seneca's a great man. It's too bad that he died. We could have had more works. But there were lots of other philosophers. There were lots of other playwrights. Boethuis we can say-- Boethius and Cassiodorus, maybe, are the two smartest people in the sixth century, judging by what they had access to, what they read, how they wrote. And that¡¯s scary. If you can say that Isidore of Seville is the smartest man of the seventh century. Or Bede and Alcuin are the smartest men of the eighth century. It's not just a compliment to them.

If you're rated like the eighteenth best tennis player in the United States, that's a tremendous accomplishment. But presumably, there are 200 tennis players who are ranked. And behind them there are 10,000 very good tennis players. But what if you were the number one tennis player in the country, and there was no number four? No number four through one hundred million. Tennis would be an endangered game. It would mean a lot, but supposing nobody followed tennis anymore? I don't know enough about antiquated games, but some medieval game that only five people know how to play. I could be the fourth ranked. But here we're not talking about sports, important though they are. We're talking about the fundamental aspects of knowledge.

Theodoric. Theodoric is a great ruler, but he had a problem that is typical of many of these barbarian groups: He had to hold his minority together. The thing that made Italy the wealthiest, the most important, the biggest prize for the barbarians is its Roman population, its Roman wealth, the preservation of its cities. But that also meant that the Ostrogoths were a tiny proportion of the total population. He needs to hold them together, but he also needs to mollify the Romans.

So it's a dangerous place for barbarian rulers. Odoacer had already been overthrown. It's too valuable to the Eastern Empire. And indeed after Theodoric died in 535, very shortly thereafter the Byzantine Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire, would invade Italy and devastate it in the course of conquering it in a twenty years¡¯ war.

?

Chapter 5: The Barbarian Tribes: Vandals, Moors, Angles, Saxons, and Visigoths [34:33]

Now if you look at the map again and turn to North Africa, you'll see we've got the Vandals in what's now Tunisia and eastern Algeria. And then Moorish kingdom and Roman Empire. Ignore Roman Empire. I don't know what they're talking about. Moorish kingdoms, what does that mean? We don't really know who these people are either. They're not invaders. They're desert peoples who have now taken over what was formerly the Roman Empire, and they're pressing the Vandals.

The Vandals were less accommodating than the Ostrogoths. They were more fiercely Arian. They persecuted the elite of the Roman population, including the Roman bishops. But they were very effective rulers. They had a navy. They were able to plunder Rome several times in the 5th century. But they were beleaguered by these Moorish groups, in other words native peoples of the North African desert. And so by 506, their kingdom has shrunk.

They were also a minority in what had been a very populous part of the Roman Empire. And they tended to fight among each other. They had internecine feuds. And so we're talking about things that are common to many of these barbarian kingdoms. Disorganization. Internal fighting. Alien religious beliefs, particularly the Arian heresy. And once they've done the plundering, inability really to start making the economy work very effectively. The Vandals would be driven out of North Africa, or obliterated actually, by the Eastern Roman Empire, in the late 520s, early 530s.

Now I'm not going to go through every one of these, but I want to give you some examples of accommodation. Go up to the British Isles. You'll see it says British kingdoms,? that means Celtic kingdoms, whose remnants would later be Wales, Scotland. And then the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. The Anglo-Saxons are invaders who come from the continent beginning in the 440s. This is the first place that Rome abandons. Here it looks more like a conventional invasion. The invaders come and the Romans pull back their troops because they're afraid that Gaul is going to fall next.

And this is an island where the Roman impress, the Roman impact, was less. There isn't a large Roman majority and a small German minority. There is a Celtic majority that blends with the invaders or that seeks refuge in these independent British kingdoms, as they're called on the map, to the west.

We don't know very much about what's going on in Britain at this time because more than Vandal North Africa, more than Ostrogothic Italy, the past is obliterated. There's very little Latin being written. We have very little knowledge of what is going on. So this is at one extreme of what might be called Barbarization verses Roman permanence.

We're going to be talking about the Franks later, and we're going to talk a little bit about the Burgundians in closing today. But this leaves really among the important groups the Visigoths. The Visigoths, the people who in a way started this with their invasions of the Balkans in the late 4th century. In 506 they control much of France, the south and the west particularly, and are trickling into Spain. We will be following, in reading Gregory of Tours, the tremendous success of the Franks against the Visigoths. And so the Visigoths will be pushed out.

?

Chapter 6: The Burgundians and the Burgundian Code [00:39:15]

What about the Burgundians? You've read the Burgundian Code-- anything strike you about it? Spencer?

Student: Mainly it focused on differences between different classes and emphasized the free men versus the slaves. Burgundians versus Romans, et cetera.

Professor Paul Freedman: Very status oriented.

Student: I didn't realize there was so much hair pulling.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah, why? What's that all about? Yeah?

Student: Well, it talked about the-- in the book it talked about how long hair became like a status symbol.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yes. So the question was, what is all this hair pulling? It's a status symbol. We'll see that the Merovingian kings wear long hair, specially long hair. And when they're finally deposed by the Carolingians, that hair is cut. Now of course, all their hair is cut, they're put in monasteries. And monks are what's called ¡°tonsured¡±. If they're not completely bald, they at least are pretty near. Like many barbarian, so-called barbarian, people, or like many people period, they're certain signs of prestige, symbols.

The Burgundian Code is drawn up between 483 and 532. It's drawn up in different stages. The Burgundians were closer to [correction: ¡°than¡±] the Ostrogoths in degree of Romanization. They're a group that wants to be Roman, or at least accepted by the Romans. They write their own law code in Latin, like the Visigoths, for example. They also write a sort of law code for the Roman population. This law code is aware of disputes between Romans and Burgundians. And if each has a different kind of law, then how do you settle a problem that arises between members of both communities?

The Burgundian law in itself shows a lot of Roman influence. For example, in chapter eighteen you've seen this title ¡°Of things that happen by chance¡± and probably didn't seem very dramatic. If any animal by chance or any dog by bite causes death to a man, we order that among Burgundians the ancient rule of blame be removed henceforth. This is an interesting question. If my dog bites you and you die, am I responsible? Is your brother going to have to kill me? That's what the Burgundian tradition would have been. But here they say if it's an accident, then your brother can't kill me.

This is the difference between -- this is a a tricky problem. Those of you who have the good fortune to go to law school are going to study this first year: torts. A tort is a so-called civil wrong as opposed to a crime. A crime is where I kill you because I want to. A tort is I leave a roller skate out on the sidewalk, you trip and die. I'm not going to be considered in the same league as someone who poisoned you, but that roller skate shouldn't be there. And of course this is a crucial thing.

For example, I've learned, fortunately not from experience, but from neighbors after Hurricane Irene, that if a tree in my yard falls on your house, I'm not to blame. Your insurance is going to have to cover that. I'm really sorry about that tree. But if you warned me, ¡°I don't like the look of that tree in your yard. It's leaning over like this. I'm afraid in the next storm it's going to fall in on your house,¡± and I don't do anything, then my understanding is that I'm liable for negligence. This was a present and obvious nuisance. It was an obvious threat, and my neighbor called my attention to it. And I didn't do anything. So next time it storms and your house is threatened by somebody else's tree, just as the wind starts to blow go next door and say, you know, I don't like the look of that tree on your property. You better do something.

These are real legal questions. And they are handled in here with some sophistication. On the other hand, there is vengeance. It's OK to practice vengeance, but there are some limitations. For example, if I kill you, your relatives can kill me, but they can't just kill my cousin. This is sort of individual-directed and not clan-directed vengeance.

There's a lot of talk about compensation and wergeld for victims. How much you pay. Whether you grab them by the hair. Whether you cut off which finger. Whether they were free or slave. Whether they were a skilled artisan or a serf. I love title X. ¡°If anyone kills a slave, barbarian by birth, a trained house servant or messenger, let him compound 60 solidi. But 200 solidi if the slave is a skilled goldsmith.¡± 40 solidi for a carpenter, and so forth.

If you cut off someone's arm, it's half of their wergeld. Wergeld is like murder. Their murder value. So I have a murder value of 100 solidi. Cut off an arm, you've got to pay me 50 solidi. This seems pretty crude, doesn't it? How does it strike you? Yes?

Student: Yeah, it does seem crude, but I think it gives a solution to something that could cause a total outbreak, a civil war.

Professor Paul Freedman: It is a maintenance of peace. And what about victims' compensation? In the Western legal tradition, if you injure me, it's a crime against the peace, and the state punishes the perpetrator. Only relatively recently has this notions of victims' rights, victims' compensation, been entered. Which is like a reversion back to the notion that the crime really injures not the state or the king or the peace that we all take for granted, but the individual who is affected.

But what makes it seem crude is the specificity of the offenses. If you look at the Connecticut Criminal Code, it's not quite so precise about hair pulling. If anyone seizes a freeman by the hair, the fine is greater if he's seized with two hands than one. Maybe that has to do with intent. One arm might be instinct. I'm pulling your hair. But two hands argues of serious intent to do harm. Or it's more humiliating. This is a culture in which there's an awful lot of shame and compensation for public shaming.

A lot of questions of personal status. In title IV about theft, if a slave commits a theft he's either beaten or killed, end of story. Freemen, that is to say people who are not slaves, pay fines and compensation. It's a violent society. Course all criminal codes show various forms of violence. There's a lot of mutilation. There are a lot of assaults on women.

Compensation for assaults on free women are paid to the women themselves, but a native freeman who assaults a maid-servant must pay the master. Maid-servant, as a slave, is regarded as a commodity.

And then finally, it's a society in which, at least according to the official law code, men are more valued than women, or men are less regulated than women. If a man breaks a marriage, in title XXXIV, he's fined if he goes and runs off with another woman. If a woman goes off and runs off with another man, she's to be smothered to death.

On that enlightened note, we'll leave the Burgundian Code. And indeed we're going to leave the barbarians only for a little while. Next week we're going to talk about the Eastern Roman Empire and why it survived and even why it flourished.

Lecture 8 - Survival in the East [September 26, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: All right, so today the question we're going to deal with is the survival of the Roman Empire in the East. Why did the Empire, based in Constantinople, survive, whereas, as we saw last week, the Western Empire based, nominally, in Rome--at times in Milan, at times in Ravenna--collapsed in the fifth century? We're going to take a long view of survival in the East--that is, from the fifth century to the mid-ninth century.

After the mid-ninth century, the Eastern Roman Empire flourishes and has a period, that we will discuss in a few weeks, of great splendor and prosperity. But this long view is justified by the fact that for 400 years, or so, this Eastern Roman Empire faced tremendous threats of invasion, sieges, difficulties dealing with all sorts of nations and peoples, and, at the same time, internal division, because of religious controversy. Or what the people who won, called heresies.

I remind you that while we call it the Eastern Roman Empire or the Byzantine Empire, they called themselves the Roman Empire--no adjective, no qualification. They were the successor to--and if they were the only successor, tough luck--the empire of Augustus, the empire of Diocletian, the empire of Constantine. In their base, before the seventh century, they were, as you see on the map. The map really shows them, more or less, at their height. Eastern Roman Empire-- notice that it goes as far as Spain in the Mediterranean. This was the accomplishment of Justinian, and emperor of the sixth century, whose reign marks a kind of apogee, a height of power of this empire, within in this period of crisis.

So while I'm saying that we are dealing with about four century's worth of sieges and crises, there is this period in the sixth century, in the reign of Justinian, who represents a kind of brief, but very important, reconquest of the West. And that's partly what you're seeing, at least the leftovers of it, in this map, that shows you the Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire in the year 600, extending--including Spain, North Africa, the coast of what's now Libya, Egypt, the Mediterranean Middle East--that is modern Israel, Syria, Lebanon--Anatolia--that is to say Asia Minor, modern Turkey--and the Balkans, Greece, and the Aegean Islands.

This empire was held together by Constantinople, which, as you see, and as we've already spoken about, is strategically placed to control access between Europe and Asia, across the Bosphorus Straits, and also between the Black Sea, which is the access point to Central Asia and the Mediterranean Sea. This city, modern Istanbul, still has the walls built by Theodosius II, in the early fifth century.

The so-called Theodosian Walls--rather nastily restored recently--are an incredible monument, still, in their ruined state, to the power of Constantinople, as they were built on the landward side. Constantinople--very difficult to attack from the sea, and, because of the walls, very difficult to attack from the land.

Until very recently, that is, I would say, until the 1980s, the Theodosian walls were not reached by the urban agglomeration of Istanbul. That is, they were so big and so far from the main center of the city, that only in recent decades has Istanbul, which is one of the fastest growing and most prosperous cities in the region, has the city leapfrogged over the walls, and the walls are now in kind of the midst of a new part of the city. Nevertheless, extremely impressive accomplishment. And the period we're dealing with is mostly sieges of Constantinople and heresies. And if you just hold that in your mind, this, somewhat, ¡°one event after another, that I never heard of,¡± quality, that this will have, I think will be, if not alleviated, at least rendered comprehensible.

?Chapter 2: Procopius¡¯ Secret History [00:05:11]

Before we go on, let me just say a few words about Procopius. Who has read the Secret History before? OK. So not too much. You should have started it. I should've warned you. It has disturbing, even weirdly pornographic parts. It is a diatribe against the Emperor Justinian. I don't think I'm giving anything away by saying that Procopius' theory about Justinian is that he's a demon, a devil, a representative of hell.

What makes this text interesting, is it's an intimate portrayal, even if it may not be an accurate one. But we will pay a certain price--we are willing to pay a certain price for intimacy, for immediacy, for the sense of an extremely sinister court. It's a little bit like reading about Stalin, or some other capricious, extremely powerful, hard-working, but bloodthirsty ruler. I think what you have to ask yourself is, how could a ruler of this particular time and polity, not be bloodthirsty? What seems to be Procopius' problem? And we'll elucidate some answers on Wednesday.

Procopius, in part, is interesting, because all of this other works are lavish in their praise of Justinian. This is an historian who knows nothing between panegyric and diatribe. Nothing between lavish servile praise and the harshest imaginable criticism. The two go together. The two are phenomena, again, all of absolutist courts from that of Louis XIV to that of twentieth century dictators. The same kind of enforced praise can create a kind of humiliation and rage that comes out in other forms.

A Secret History had to be secret, because had the authorities read a few words of this, Procopius would have not died in bed, as, indeed, he did. We know this from one manuscript in the Vatican found in the seventeenth century. OK. So that's my introduction to Procopius.

Chapter 3: Circumstances of the Survival of the East [00:07:36]

When we talk about survival of the East, we're talking about survival under several different kinds of circumstances. So our first concern is, how did the East survive the fifth century, which destroyed the Western Roman Empire? Part of the answer is geography. The East was easier to defend, especially, as I've just said, the position of Constantinople, both as an impregnable site and as a commercial city with very, very extensive trade, and as a base to defend the two core territories of the Empire. By core territories, I mean that, really, the essential parts of this empire, which are the Balkans--including Greece under that rubric, for the moment--and Asia Minor. And, of course, Constantinople is ideally placed to protect both of them.

Other advantages of the East over the West--a bit richer, more urbanized, produced more taxable revenues than the West. It's army didn't fall apart. It's civilian structure of administration remained intact.

With the exception of Justinian, very few these emperors are that outstanding in their abilities. But their subordinates were very capable, the government worked well, and the East survived a number of powerful threats from the outside. ¡°From the outside¡± meaning it had the same problem as the Roman Empire, in an, admittedly, smaller and more defensible space. It had an eastern frontier and it had a northern frontier, both of which were fragile. The eastern frontier with Persia--we already talked about them--and the Northern frontier, along the Danube River, more or less, with all sorts of different peoples, from the Avars, Slavs, Bulgars, all sorts of nations that would attack it.

It also had the disadvantage of internal religious dissent. And we're going to be talking more about this. These problems, eventually, did affect the East adversely. It would have a period of pretty radical decline, not so different from that of the West. Beginning in the seventh century, this decline can be seen in the abandonment of many cities, or their much smaller population--we've already seen that as a feature of the West-- in the loss of territory. We're going to be talking about Islam and the Arab conquests. But they begin in the seventh century, and, very quickly, result in the loss, from the Byzantine point of view, of Egypt and the Mediterranean Near East.

But unlike the West, the Byzantine, or East Roman government, never collapsed in the face of these threats. Although, it is a kind of period of cultural decline. Certainly, a period of military defeats, of sieges, of political problems, and of religious dissent. Nevertheless, the Empire would survive. In general, during this period, what unites these 400 years--we're talking about, roughly, 450 to 850--is the ability of the empire to resist invasions, its willingness to accept the loss of certain provinces, while protecting others, and its domination of Constantinople over its region. At the opening of our period, cities like Alexandria and Antioch are extremely important. Their importance within the Byzantine Empire declines.

Chapter 4: Christological Controversies ¨C Nestorianism and Monophysitism [00:11:57]

But in order to understand that some of the internal problems, we're going to have to talk about heresies. I think I already apologized for having to talk about heresies, and I think I already explained why it's important. Questions, remarks, denunciations? OK. Representatives of the iconoclast defense fund want to claim equal time? OK.

This is just a selection of heresies, right? I mean, it's the proverbial tip of the iceberg, the proverbial icing on the cake, the proverbial--what do you call it--crust on the chocolate pudding. But having said that, these two are what are called Christological controversies. They're about the nature of Christ. The relationship of his human to divine nature. And, grossly, to oversimplify, the Nestorians emphasize Christ's divine nature, and the Monophysites, Christ's human nature. [correction:? the nestorians emphasize Christ¡¯s human nature; the Monophysites His divine nature].

The beginning of this controversy is with the Nestorians, named after the patriarch, Nestorius, the bishop, Patriarch of Constantinople. Nestorius seemed to teach--and he's patriarch in the 420s, and the stories would be deposed in 431 as patriarch. His followers seemed to teach that Christ was fully human and that his divine nature was either separate from is human nature, or it was nonexistent or irrelevant. I should remind you that the problem is posed by Christ being God and yet, being crucified and suffering and dying. So this is a problem that, logically, arises out of an understanding of who Christ is and what he does for humanity.

Nestorius was deposed by the Third Ecumenical Council of Constantinople--I'm sorry, the Third Ecumenical Council, which meets in Ephesus, on the western shore of Asia Minor. Council of Ephesus, Ecumenical Council--the third one in 431. The first two had dealt with Arianism. I remind you that Arianism is a different problem, because it deals not with the nature of Christ, but the relationship of Christ to God the Father. Here, we're now just concentrating on Christ. The Monophysites, in opposing the Nestorians, naturally emphasized Christ's divine nature, as the Nestorians had, in their opinion, overemphasized the human nature.

But from the point of view of the group that we can call Orthodox, the people who believe neither in Nestorianism nor Monophysitism, both sides were extremists. The Monophysites over- did Christ's divine nature. If the Nestorians taught that Christ had two natures, a kind of fully human one and a fully divine one, that were separate, the Monophysites seemed to be teaching, or did teach, that Christ had one nature, and that, essentially, divine. The relationship of the human and divine natures,in Monophysitism was denounced by their opponents as if you threw a bucket of water into the ocean. The bucket of water representing the human part. What's at stake in this, and why it's important, is how Christ saves people. If he is too human, then he's just a human, elevated by God, like some kind of ancient-world hero. And he doesn't seem, then, to have the power to save people from the devil, hell, original sin, all of these terrible things that God has saved the followers of Christ from. If he's divine, completely divine, then what's the point of distinguishing him from God the Father? And then, how did he suffer on the cross? Was his suffering real? Can God, with no human elements, suffer?

Questions about this so far? We understand the difference, then? And we, sort of, understand what's at stake? Sort of, because maybe we are thinking--I hope not, because you're not in a medieval frame of mind, if you're thinking this--you may be thinking, though, none the less, ¡°Well, why don't they just agree to disagree?¡± Or something like, ¡°Hey, you can believe in one nature, I'll believe in two.¡± Or, ¡°You can believe in two separate natures, I'll believe in two natures coexisting. And God will reward your good intentions.¡±

That's really the problem, is that we live in a society in which, at least, so we may think. enlightened people don't really impose their beliefs, in detail, on others. We're not really interested in theology that much. But the Bible, I've got to admit, does say that it is important to have the right belief. The Bible, particularly, but not exclusively, the Old Testament, is very bad on rewarding good intentions.

The further back you go in the Bible, the less are good intentions rewarded. Lot's wife was told not to look back. She looked back. She was turned into a pillar of salt. Nobody said, ¡°Oh, OK, you didn't mean to look back¡± or you know, ¡°human weakness¡±. That's just it. Or the guy--now I'm betraying my ignorance--who stumbles as they're carrying the tabernacle back to Jerusalem, from captivity with the Philistines. Is it Usiah? Well, anyway, I shouldn't get started on things I'm not sure of.

But the guy stumbles, and God strikes him dead. He stumbled. Nobody asks him, ¡°Oh, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to stumble,¡± or ¡°a little rabbit ran in front of me.¡± He stumbles; he dies; that's it. God wants you to understand what's going on. Insofar as you don't make errors. Therefore, the right understanding of Christ's nature is important. It's not just a matter of convincing other people that one band is better than another, or one kind of game is better another, or one team is better than another. It is crucial.

Gregory of Nyssa, himself a theologian, writes, about 500 AD or so, that the mood of theological controversy is so great, that if you go into a shop, and you ask about your change, he says, the shopkeeper philosophizes about the begotten and the unbegotten. If you inquire about a loaf of bread, the baker will reply, that the Son is inferior, and the Father is superior. And if you ask if your bath is ready, the attendant says that the sun is made out of nothing. Now, all of this is a satiric remark about the way in which ordinary people are caught up in this religious controversy. It is not, exclusively, a matter of intellectuals or clergy. But it's a political problem as well, and that's the reason that it really preoccupies us.

In the Council of Chalcedon in 451-454. So Ephesus, 431, Chalcedon, 451 to 454. Chalcedon, also on the other side of Constantinople, on the Asian side of what's now Turkey. The Council of Chalcedon denounced the Monophysites. It basically says that Christ has two natures. They are both perfect, they are indivisible, but they are separate. Two natures, one person, one hypostasis. A ¡°hypostasis¡± is a thing that exists in its own right.

This solution was suggested by Rome, by the pope. The same Pope Leo the Great, who'd negotiated with the Huns. The West had the advantage of not experiencing these kinds of controversies. And so Constantinople, far more powerful than Rome in the 450s--Rome, about to collapse completely--nevertheless, is beholden to Rome for, at least what would be the majority solution, to the problem of Monophysitism.

Of course, actually, it's not a solution, because not everybody acknowledges the Council of Chalcedon. It provokes a split. The Patriarch of Alexandria would be the leader of those resisting the Council, and Egypt, Syria, and, to some extent, Lebanon and Palestine, would be Monophysite, steadfastly. Indeed, the survivors of the Monophysites--that is the modern-day representatives of this part of Christianity--are the Copts, in Egypt, who form 10% of the population--Christian Monophysites--and the Christians of Ethiopia, who form a little more than 50% of the population of Ethiopia. The so-called Coptic Christians are the descendants of the Monophysites.

The Nestorians also have some scattered followers in the modern world. They were very strong in Central Asia. And if you've studied things like the voyages of Marco Polo and other Western travelers in the thirteenth century, the people who interpret for them, who help them, who acquaint them with central Asia and the Chinese Mongol Empire, are Nestorians. But we're going to leave them out, because they're not a political problem for the Byzantine Empire. They're, pretty much, exiled.

The Copts are an internal problem. And the Monophysites, or Copts, do not like the Orthodox, the Byzantine Emperors. The Byzantine Emperors try to compromise with them. And I'll mention a couple of these compromises. The Emperor Zeno, from 474 to 491, issued a document called the Henotikon. We're back to emperors. As with--we saw as far back as Constantine, emperors trying to intervene to solve religious controversies, right?

The Henotikon says, one of the Trinity was incarnate, and we're not going to discuss it anymore. So first, it says this rather noncommittal statement: ¡°One of the Trinity was incarnate.¡± And then it also outlaws any further discussion. Nobody liked this.

Zeno was succeeded by Anastasius, who was a Monophysite. And then, as we'll see, the great emperor of the sixth century, Justinian, who we're going to be looking at much more closely, was a fierce anti-Monophysite or Chalcedonian, Orthodox. But his wife was, sort of, semi-Monophysite. This may have been politic. Since they were both effective rulers, the people who were Monophysite could orient themselves to Theodora, the Empress, and the Orthodox, to Justinian. Ultimately, this problem would be quote, "solved," because the Arab Muslim invasion of the seventh century would take over the Monophysite territories.

Chapter 5: The Rise of Islam, the Persian Threat, and Barbarian Invasions [00:26:48]

Again, I hope I'm not giving away a secret, by saying that the most striking, sweeping, and dramatic event of Mediterranean world or of the Eurasian land mass of the period that we're dealing with, arguably, is the rise of Islam. Mohammed's Hegira is in the 632-633--I can't remember. Anybody know, off hand? Anyone want to look it up, off hand? H-E-G-I-R-A.

Student: 622.

Professor Paul Freedman: 622. 622. By 660, Egypt, Syria, Palestine, Lebanon have fallen to Muslim rule. And they are extending their power as far west as North Africa and as far east as Afghanistan. How this happens, why this happens, is the subject for discussion a little later. But again, if you refer to the map in 600, this is before the Islamic takeover. And again, if you look further east, the Eastern Roman Empire consists of all these parts, many of which are about to be taken away from it. And the parts that were taken away from it were pretty much the Monophysite parts.

So the fifth century is the story of the survival of the Eastern Roman Empire, despite these religious controversies. The early sixth century, which we'll talk about in more detail, is the story of the expansion of the Empire to make a stab at reuniting, by conquering the West, what had been the single Roman Empire.

Justinian's empire was overextended, at least in retrospect. This is a reconquest that, at least, consultants from a later generation would have said was a mistake, an overexpansion. Initially, the main enemy of the Byzantine Empire, after Justinian--so in the late sixth century, early seven century--would be Persia. But also, at the same time, the Byzantine Empire would start experiencing Danubian frontier incursions, attacks from the Balkans. And here again, as I said, it's all invaders and heresies. Invasions from Slavs and Avars in the Balkans, and the Persians in the East.

OK. In? 591, a revolution toppled the Persian ruler, who, peculiarly enough, fled to Byzantium for refuge, where the Emperor Maurice helped him gain his throne back. In 591, there was a peace between Persia and Byzantium, and Byzantium seemed to have come out of this terrible period of warfare of the late sixth century.

This allowed Maurice to turn his attention to his other front, his Western- Northern front, where the Avars were a tremendous threat to him. The Avars, a central Asiatic people, who come in through Central Asia into the Balkans. And they carry with them, to some extent, the Slavs. The conventional portrayal used to be that the Avars sort of lead the Slavs; the latter are kind of passive. It's a little more complicated than that. The Avars had taken the great cities of the Balkans. And in 492, Maurice turns to deal with them, to push them back against the Danube. His army rebels against him, and he's overthrown and killed.

The beginning of the seventh century is the period of the maximum danger of Byzantium. It lasts, with intermittent flashes, from 602, the overthrow of Maurice, to 717, the Arab Siege of Constantinople. Immediately, this new emperor, Phocas, is attacked by Persia. The Persian King claiming to revenge the murder of his benefactor, but, in fact, simply reopening the war with Constantinople.

In 608-609, the Persians and the Avars are allied, and the Persians are really on the march. By 617, they have taken Egypt, they have taken Syria, they have taken in Jerusalem, and the relic of the Holy Cross has been taken back to the Persian capital. The emperor, at this time, Heraclius, whom Wickham is not very impressed by, admittedly.

Heraclius leads a resistance, as does the patriarch, to a siege that is on both sides of the city of Constantinople. On the one side, the land side, the Theodosian Walls, are the Avars and the Slavs on the Bosporus. Across the city, on the Asian side of the Bosporus, are the Persians. And what Heraclius does, is to confide the city in the care of the patriarch, and go off and attack the Persians from the rear.

The patriarch defends the city, not only by organizing the army, but by putting wonder-working icons on the walls, to face the enemy. An icon is a painting of a sacred figure. So then, it is not a statue, but a painting. And it portrays a saint or Mary or Christ. And in what has come to be called the Orthodox tradition, these remain today, a figure of the church, a very distinct kind of aspect of the piety of the East.

The Church--patriarch ordered that the Church melt down all of the treasures that had been given to it, to decorate it, in order to pay for troops. So the combination of the icons, the money, the spirit of the populous, and military means were able to withstand this prolonged siege--at times a double siege--of the Persians on one side, the Avars and the Slavs on the other side.

After many years of fighting in the East, Heraclius succeeded in overthrowing the Persians. At the battle of Nineveh in 627--this is a seventeen-year war or so. I'm sorry, Nineveh--E-H.

Heraclius defeats the Persians, and the Persian Empire is virtually crippled. 627--Byzantium would have seemed to have been triumphant. The first Arab attacks, however, were in 634, twelve years after Mohammed's Hegira. By 636, Syria had been taken; by 638 Jerusalem had been taken; and the True Cross, again--in this case, we lose sight of it.

Persia, itself, would collapse in 640 and pass under Arab rule. Egypt would fall in 645. What's left of the Empire, then, is the Balkans and Anatolia--some Armenian, some Slavic elements. So weak is this empire, so beset by enemies, does it seem to be, that a successor of Heraclius, the emperor Constans II, moved the capital to Sicily, to the West. Constans II ruled from Syracuse--Syracuse, Sicily, obviously--the original Syracuse. He would be the last emperor to visit Rome. And he was, actually, the first since 476.

So in 662, when he moved the capital to Sicily, we have the spectacle of a kind of ghost emperor visiting a ghost city. Visit of Constans II to Rome, and the severe crisis of the Eastern Empire beset, as it was now, particularly, but not exclusively, by the Arabs. And indeed, in 674, the Arab fleet appeared off Constantinople. In 678, we hear, for the first time, of the weapon of the Greeks against the Arab fleets--a weapon called ¡°Greek fire¡±.

Greek fire is some kind of flaming projectile. In other words, something that you can shoot with a catapult, or some other propulsion device, that will burst into flame. Obviously, you can't launch it if it's already burning. You have to have something that--this is the essence of basic bomb throwing--you have to have something that will explode on impact. The Greek fire was, particularly, effective on wooden ships and on rigging and sails. It would set the ships on fire. And it's a weapon that seems to have been unique, at least for awhile, to the Byzantines.

But, parenthetically, how was it that the Arabs have a navy, in the first place? These people, who decades before, had never seen a river that flowed all year long, who had no experience with the sea, for whom the desert was the sea. It is an example of this kind of very rapid adaptability that we'll emphasize, when we come to talk about the Islamic invasion. The East did survive even this attack.

Chapter 6: Iconoclasm [00:39:25]

The seventh century--we will be dealing with in more detail--is a crucial turning point. By this time, the Eastern Roman Empire we're talking about as the East is pretty much a Greek Empire. Justinian would be the last emperor to speak Latin. And the truncation of the empire, with the loss of Egypt and the Near East, means that it is pretty much a Greek empire and, also, pretty much an Orthodox empire. Orthodoxy is the Christian faith that stands between Nestorianism and Monophysitism.

For the time, the Orthodox world, in the East, and the Catholic world, in the West, are the same. Their official break won't come until 1054. And as you know, to this day, the Orthodox churches of Russia, Greece, and so forth, look very different. And they also have certain doctrinal differences with the West. And that's not our subject, for the time being. We do have, however, before the close of business, one more heresy. A heresy that starts to divide the Byzantine Empire in the late seventh century, and that is iconoclasm.

Iconoclasm, which Wickham talks about in some detail, and which he tells us to take seriously. What he means by that, is that iconoclasm seems to be something that must not be about what it seems to be. It's got to be about something else. Iconoclasm is the belief that images, like icons, in particular, are dangerous. And that they lead to inappropriate worship of the image, rather than what the image symbolizes. So the iconoclasts believe in banning images of persons. A cross is fine, but not a picture of a saint. Even, in some circles, pictures of Christ would be suspect. The danger of this reverence paid to icons is that the icon, then, becomes a sacred thing in itself, and you've fallen into idolatry. You're worshipping multiple representatives of the divine.

Now it certainly seems logical that this must have something to do with Islam. Because Islam, in its most monotheist manifestations, frowns on and bans the representation of purportedly divine figures. And it, indeed, doesn't like figural representation at all, in decoration of sacred spaces. Lest this be interpreted as exalting figures, even the Prophet--especially the Prophet himself. There are no pictures of Muhammad for home consumption, for mosque display.

And so it seems logical that this is a response to criticism from Islam, that Christianity is really not monotheist, that it's a form of idolatry, because it has so many sacred figures. And that the success of Islam and the success of the Arabs against Byzantium, might be caused by the abandonment of monotheism, the abandonment of the worship of one god and the proliferation of multiple gods. The problem is that there's no real evidence of this. And you don't have to have Islam to force this kind of thing.

If you look around the churches of much of Northern Europe, you will see statues that have been decapitated by Protestants, in the sixteenth and seventeenth century, or stained glass that was destroyed by Protestants. Protestantism is iconoclastic in many of its forms, in that it believed that the Catholic Church was superstitious, paid reverence to all of these saints and human figures, and forgot, in the process, to concentrate on the single God.

Iconoclasm is a crisis of the empire. It is also, like these other heresies, a recurrence of this problem of how to represent the connection between God and human beings. What connects the divine with the humans? Are there intermediaries? Is Christ an intermediary, or is he God? And if he's God, how is there intermediation? Why does God care about us? How does God care about us? How many ways are there to approach him?

It took until 843 to settle this controversy. It had many periods of settlement and then a recrudescence. It's a controversy that lasts, then, something on the order of 150, 160 years. At times, it divides the Empire completely, at times not. It tends to be supported by the emperor. If the emperor isn't iconoclastic, it tends to wane. It's supported by the emperors, partly, as a way of trying to unify and mobilize the Empire around the figure of the emperor, instead of dissipating the energies around the various saintly figures.

Chapter 7: Conclusion [00:43:35]

So where are we, with this empire, that seems to consist of only sieges and barbarian peoples and heresies? In the ninth century, it would seem that the cities, with the exception of Constantinople itself, had declined to become little more than fortresses. We seem to be at the end of classical antiquity, in some fundamental way, of that society built around Mediterranean cities. Society even here, as in the West, is rural.

There's not a whole lot of trade. There still are libraries, with books in them, but they don't seem to be read very much. We have very few texts from this era. It's a militarized society. It's an intensely religious one. There's very little secular literature--really at the end of Greco-Roman Pagan knowledge. As it happens, however, this period would usher in an era of surprising, at least in retrospect, prosperity for the Byzantine Empire. And we will be talking about that later.

On Wednesday, we're going to discuss the reign of Justinian, through Procopius, as a thing, in itself. And then, we will turn to the post-Roman world of the West, subsequently. Thanks very much.

Lecture 9 - The Reign of Justinian [September 28, 2011]

Chapter 1: Primary Sources: Procopius and Gregory of Tours [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: We are starting to use primary sources for our understanding of the historical periods under discussion. Primary sources? Writings by people who lived at the time. And as with all such sources, the great advantage is vividness, immediacy--the people lived through it. And the problem is distance from us and strangeness.

Procopius and Gregory of Tours, who we'll be starting out with next week, are very different writers. Procopius much more conscious of style, a layman, was somebody operating within the classical tradition.

Gregory of Tours, certainly a person for whom style is not paramount. Or at least, it's not the classical notions of rhetoric, smoothness, and vividness that Procopius has. He is a bishop. He's very concerned with supernatural events and the Church. Or let's say, supernatural events controlled by the Church.

Procopius, as you've seen, is not very concerned with Christianity, and the supernatural events that concerned him, such as Justinian walking around the palace with no head, are not Christian supernatural. They're from some other older supernatural tradition.

But both Gregory of Tours and Procopius require an effort to figure out. Why not just read something by a writer, a historian living now who may be easier to figure out? And who is writing with you and me in mind? Because of the vividness and because of the trickiness of trying to reconstruct not only what happened, which is hard enough, but also what the mood of people was, and what the reaction was.

Chapter 2: The Emperor Justinian [00:02:19]

We're talking about Justinian today. So an emperor whose rule occupies most of the sixth century, 527 to 565. So we're concentrating on the sixth century as part of this overall survival and crisis of the Eastern Roman Empire. His reign, or more precisely, the earlier part of his reign until about 540, is the height, apogee, maximum power of this empire which succeeds in shall we say, reconquering or conquering. Taking back or adding the parts of the Western Roman Empire, many parts of the Western Roman Empire that had been lost effectively to the barbarian invasions of the fifth century.

If you still can refer to your map, or if your memory of geography is OK--The major areas of conquest of Justinian beyond the borders of the old eastern empire are first North Africa--this is the coast of modern Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and even Morocco, held by the Vandals and seized by Justinian; parts of Spain, coastal Spain, Mediterranean Spain, held by the Visigoths; and Italy, held by the Ostrogoths.

This is the centerpiece of Justinian's reign. And for a time, it looked as if he had, in effect, recreated the empire of Constantine and Diocletian. But as we'll see, this is a triumph with a terrible price. The terrible price being that it weakened Byzantium.

Now when we say of figures in the past, or even figures in the recent past, that their policies were a mistake because it turned out that the future enemy would be something other than what they were fighting, we can say that with the advantage of being able to see what was going happen. In other words, there are people who argue that the invasion of Iraq was a folly or that the expenditures on the aggressive foreign policy of the first years of the twenty-first century was foolish, because as it turns out, economic problems, domestic problems, the mortgage bubble, was really the problem that people should have been addressing. Or they should have been addressing the deficit.

You can say that. In its own way, it's a fact. But it doesn't necessarily tell you what people at the time should have thought of. Thus, we know from last lecture that, first of all, Justinian should have concentrated on the Persians. The Persians on his eastern frontier who didn't interest him, who he just wanted to sort of pacify in order to go west and make his conquests. The Persians would turn out to be the biggest enemy of the Empire.

And so, you know if you were plotting this out as a kind of international political strategy, you could say: ¡°Forget about the Ostrogoths. Forget about the Vandals. Build up that frontier. Invade Persia, keep your army there.¡± And indeed, with a little more hindsight, we can say, ¡°Oh my gosh, in eighty years, the Muslims are going to take the eastern part of your empire.¡±

Well, obviously, there's no way he is going to be expected reasonably to know that. Except, if you're looking at a distance, from over 1,000 years, 1,500 years. Then we can say, sure, the eastern frontier turns out to be the point of vulnerability. So a classic kind of historical problem, or early Middle Ages midterm question is:? ¡°Justinian, overreacher or reasonable guy?¡± Or ¡°The conquest of the west: folly or grandeur?¡± And it's both.

It is a classic example of over-extension, over-extension of empires, meaning that empires weaken themselves at some point fatally by simply getting either too big or spending too much money. And the two are linked. If you get too big, you have to spend more money to defend yourself. Not really having the resources to keep what you have.

The British Empire, to take a reasonably clear and neutral example, at some point is simply too large for the resources of a weakened Great Britain. And our colleague Paul Kennedy has explored, quite memorably, empires that simply could not maintain their commitments. The Spanish Empire, the British Empire, and, as it turned out after Kennedy wrote his book, the Russian Soviet Empire.

This is a pattern in history that repeats itself. The question, however, is, under the circumstances, and assuming the existence of that empire, what are reasonable policies to preserve it or to extend it?

Chapter 3: Procopius as a Source on Justinian [00:08:42]

We know about Justinian's wars of conquest and of defense--he did have some wars against the Persians--his wars of conquest and defense largely, although not exclusively, through Procopius. He is our best source in two works. One, the Secret History, and the other, much more extensive, a series of books called The Wars. And they're divided in Persian wars, African wars, Italian wars. In The Wars, you can see that once the Italian war starts to go badly, Procopius's opinion of Justinian and of the great general Belisarius tend to change from a kind of admiration and go, kill, get 'em spirit to uneasiness, to blaming, to a kind of finger pointing.

So we're dependent on Procopius. And when you first read The Wars, it seems very, very different from the Secret History. It seems like it's by Thucydides or some other sensible, objective Greek writer. And he indeed is writing in that tradition. Those of you who've read Thucydides will remember he describes, often, folly and very terrible events, but soberly, factually. And in a fashion of Olympian sorrow at the folly of policymakers and generals.

And to some extent, Procopius has that tone, which seems to contrast very much with the vehemence of the Secret History, leading some people to assume that he was crazy when he wrote the Secret History. Or off balance, let's say. Or that The Wars represented the real Procopius, and this represented his evil twin. The term, ¡°evil twin¡±, doesn't appear in Gibbon, but it could. It could.

What makes it more complicated is a third work of his called Buildings. Buildings is, as the name implies, a book about Justinian's building campaign, which includes, but is no means limited to, the church of Hagia Sofia in modern Istanbul, which is, continues to be, to this day, an extraordinary building of such immensity and such space in interior. A dome that seems unsupported by anything and that seems to cover half the earth when you're inside it. Both splendid and an extraordinary engineering feat.

And then Justinian built churches. He built churches that stand in Ravenna with unbelievably beautiful mosaics, Ravenna in Italy. And these are important because Ravenna was outside the zone of territory controlled by the iconoclasts. And, therefore while the iconoclasts tended to take down or whitewash representations of anything divine, their reach did not extend as far as Ravenna. So in a way, the best examples of Byzantine mosaic art of the earliest period--not in a way, but absolutely are outside of the eastern Mediterranean, and in Italy.

Buildings though, is not just an account of Justinian's architectural essays, but a panegyric, a praise of Justinian. Almost as slavishly adulatory as the Secret History is a condemnation. And as I suggested last time, these actually go together in a society where a tremendous power is concentrated in one person, or one court, or one setting, the reactions of people tend to be adulation, which is, to some extent, forced out of them, or at least invited by the ruler.

So again, to take an obvious analogy: Stalin, for his seventieth birthday was pleased that the greatest museum of Moscow, all the permanent exhibit was set aside and warehoused, and the whole museum was given over to gifts to Stalin on his seventieth birthday from a grateful people. He didn't have to order it. Somebody came up with the idea and he said, ¡°Oh, don't go to any trouble.¡± They had the thing, this adulatory. This is what later would be called the ¡°cult of personality¡±. And it's just one of hundreds of examples. Naming cities after him, lauding him as ¡°the Great Gardener¡±, ¡°the Friend of Children¡±, ¡°the successor of Lenin¡±, and so forth.

The other side of that is a kind of hatred and diatribe, more or less secret. There were lots of jokes about Stalin. You could and people were sent to Siberia or executed for telling these jokes. But they were very good jokes, under the circumstances. This is some of the explanation for how you can get, at the same time, adulation and demonization.

The interesting thing, of course, is it's in the same guy, Procopius. And although people at one time thought, ¡°Oh, well, he wrote The Buildings earlier and then became disillusioned.¡± He did become disillusioned. Everybody became disillusioned, because after 540, things started to go wrong. There's a huge plague in 542 that kills off a third of the population, for starters. But it looks as if he's writing this stuff more or less at the same time.

The Secret History is not finished. That's why it begins so oddly, not with Justinian, but with Belisarius and Belisarius' wife, being kicked around by his wife, and Theodora and you sort of don't know who these people are. And then suddenly we're at Justinian. Well, the order of this thing is not yet set. He probably did not finish it. He did, however, want it to be published after his death.

It's called the Secret History or the Anecdota, sort of stories, by later writers. It survives in only one manuscript, as I think I remarked. Nevertheless, because it has a highly rhetorical style, it clearly was to be read by other people. It's not just a set of jottings for his own satisfaction. It is a work that he hoped would be widely published when he was safely dead. And Anecdota literally means, not ¡°stories¡± as it would now, anecdotes, the false cognate, it means ¡°not to be published¡±. So in the Secret History, Justinian is a monster.

Chapter 4: Background on Justinian [00:16:28]

Let's set that aside for a moment and talk about what Justinian actually did. Justinian was the power behind the throne of his uncle, Justin the First. So in a way, his rule goes back to the 510s. Justinian's character, as portrayed by Procopius in both The Wars and in the Secret History, is very smart, hard-working--Procopius says he almost never slept--devoted to details, capable of immersing himself in many different things: architecture, church ceremonies, theology, and law.

He was of humble birth. His uncle, his family were soldiers. They were from modern oh, Croatia, more or less, the Balkan peninsula, the former Yugoslavia--Illyrians, as would have been the term used at the time. He grew up speaking some form of Latin, and he is, as I said last time, the last emperor whose native language was Latin as opposed to Greek.

He dressed very simply, and he was approachable. He did not have that awe-inspiring splendor of Diocletian or Constantine, for example. He was seldom angry, but he was cold and seems to have had no trace of mercy or kindness. He reminds me of some professors of mine. He was intolerant; he was unforgiving; and he was merciless.

He had a grandiose conception of the Empire. And he was willing to tax his subjects heavily and to endanger the security of the eastern frontier in order to expand his territory and his prestige. I think that is a fair judgment to make. He believed that his predecessors had, through neglect, lost what the ancient Romans had conquered. And he believed that you couldn't call it the Roman Empire if all it consisted of were possessions in the eastern Mediterranean. And, as we've said, he did indeed conquer, at great cost, North Africa, parts of Spain and Italy.

He had a--I think it's wrong to use the term totalitarian, but certainly a very strong conception of imperial rulership. He tried to impose doctrines on the Church in order to resolve the age-old Monophysite question. He was no more successful than Constantine or Theodosius, by the way, but, for example, just to give you a sense of his methods, he kidnapped the Pope in Rome, tried to browbeat him, and exiled him to the Crimean Peninsula where he died.

Theodora. One of the most interesting things about Justinian is that he gave so much power and respect to his consort, Theodora, who was of even more humble birth than he was. Now, I don't think we have to believe Procopius on the details of Theodora's youth. He certainly reserves his most hysterical diatribes for Theodora. I think it's fair to say that Procopius was not a great admirer of competent women.

The historian Bury, J. B. Bury, one of the great historians of late Rome and Byzantium, who wrote about 100, 120 years ago, describes her youth as stormy. An adjective that I like, because it could be anything. Her stormy youth. Probably her father was a bear keeper. Somebody who kept bears for the entertainment of people at the circus. An animal trainer. She was the mother of a legitimate [correction: illegitimate] child. She may have had a background of amateur or quasi-professional, semi-pro prostitution.

Notice that Procopius condemns her, first for being a prostitute, and then for suppressing prostitution once she became Empress. There's a logic to that. Procopius is not opposed to prostitution. One has the sense that he's, if not a connoisseur, at least a now-and-then partaker. But for prostitutes to be anything other than this firmly subordinated class, that is, for prostitutes to have some sort of voice or opinion, or for people to endeavor to help them, or respect them, is, in his mind, ridiculous and scandalous.Procopius is a conservative. He doesn't like the weakening of the senatorial classes. He represents the land-owning interests. He doesn't like too much imperial power. He's quite happy to respect the emperor, but is angry when the emperor seems to be taxing rich people. He doesn't like upstarts. Upstarts like Justinian. Who is he? A soldier's child. Upstarts like Theodora. Upstarts like Antonia, the wife of Belisarius.

Justinian and Theodora ruled as a team. They had very different personalities. A very interesting team. Theodora loved sleep, luxury, was sympathetic to the Monophysites. Justinian was completely the opposite: an insomniac, somebody who dressed in extremely ordinary clothing, and firmly anti-Monophysite. They, in fact, supported different factions in the circus. Here is a Giants-Jets marriage.

Chapter 5: The Circus, the Blues and the Greens, and the Nika Riots [00:24:10]

The circus. The circus was a arena attached to the palace, where the emperor would make his appearances at sporting events. Although we've said Justinian was approachable, by that we mean that people in the government or in high positions could see him without too much ceremony. That doesn't mean he's approachable just to anybody.

In an absolutist state, there are certain kinds of events at which the ruler has to show himself, or traditionally shows himself. So in the Soviet era, the May Day parades. There's a reviewing stand in Moscow at the tomb of Lenin. And foreign correspondents and intelligence people would try to see who was in and out of power by who appeared with the leader, who wasn't there, where they were standing.

The Hippodrome, the horse racing arena in Constantinople, was a bit like this. The Emperor had his own box, and the people could make sort of celebratory gestures to him, praise him, and if they were in a rebellious mood, criticize him as well. There were of circus factions, as they're called. That is, people who were cheering for one side or another, the most important of which in Constantinople are the Blues and the Greens.

The Greens tended to be somewhat pro-Monophysite, and Theodora was a partisan of the Greens. The Blues, anti-Monophysite; Justinian was a partisan of theirs. In 532, the circus factions revolted. Partly, it's a tax revolt. Partly it's factions fighting.

It doesn't do to try to probe what these factions represented too much. After a while, they're simply factions. They're simply people who like to fight. Or who like to root for one side or another. But they are rowdy, and even criminal. They have very outlandish costumes. They expend all their money and all their energy on sporting events and on rowdiness associated with them. This is not completely unfamiliar.

The prefect of the city arrested seven people for rioting and condemned them to death. Two of them escaped when the rope broke. It always pays to maintain your--I mean, this is a tip from a historian-- always pays to maintain your coercive equipment. Once these guys escaped, then they were heroes. And they were shielded from the crowd. They were put in a monastery where they had sanctuary.

And conveniently enough, one was a Blue and one was a Green. So the Blues and the Greens united. They ran through the streets demanding pardon for the escapees. And when Justinian refused, a riot took place. The battle cry of these rioters was ¡°Victory!¡±. Right? Nika, not to be confused with sporting equipment. Nika - victory. The crowds tried to overthrow Justinian and Theodora. And in the process, they burned down a lot of the city.

Justinian is reported by Procopius as being ready to flee. But Theodora stiffened his resolve, basically telling him she preferred to die in the shroud of the imperial robes, rather than flee in disguise, and mobilized the generals, Belisarius and Narses. We've met Belisarius already. And they cracked down on the mob and killed maybe 40,000 of them. How many people attend a Yankee game? About 80,000? So 30,000, 40,000 people, and that ended the riots. Constantinople was partially burned.

Justinian loved building. This was a great opportunity. He couldn't have asked for a better moment, in a sense. Of course, it required more taxes, but people now had seen the problems with resisting taxes. And so this is where we start the building of the new Hagia Sofia that we see today. Built in five years. Compare this to grand projects like you know an exit on the Connecticut Turnpike, which take fifteen years or so.

The way you build something in five years is by an incredible number of workmen. And lavish expenditure of money. The patriarch¡¯s throne in Hagia Sofia was made of silver. It weighed 40,000 pounds. The columns are of porphyry, many of them. It uses a lot of glass in order to emit light. And the light comes from so far away that it forms these wonderful patterns, depending on the time of day. Justinian also rebuilt the Senate, the baths, the imperial palace, the Church of Saint Irene, the Church of the Apostles, et cetera, et cetera.

Chapter 6: Justinian¡¯s Wars [00:30:20]

He started his wars against Persia before the Nika revolt. And the war with Persia is one episode of a multi-century war. In this case, it's over influence in the Caucasus. But it's really about trying to protect Byzantium from Persian invasion. But as I said, Justinian's interest was not really in Persia. He was interested in peace with Persia and in securing enough of the frontier so that the Persians couldn't launch, at least not easily, a surprise attack. And in 531, the Eastern Roman Empire and Persia signed a perpetual peace. And Justinian then moved his troops to the west.,the site of his real ambitions.

The Vandal War in North Africa was a triumph. What we're seeing is one of those cases in which a policy seems to succeed miraculously easily. The Vandals fell, it seemed, without a fight. Here, the people who had been the terror of Rome 100 years earlier, who had sacked Rome in 455, who had seized the granary of Rome in 430, fell almost, it seemed, without a fight. True, the native Berber population who were subordinate to the Vandals, desert people, revolted. And they were able to raid the coast and to undermine the position of the Byzantine occupiers.

The next stop was Italy in 535. 533 - 534, the conquest of Africa. But Italy would take twenty years, not one. And in the process, Italy itself would be devastated. And with that devastation, a lot of classical culture would be lost. What wasn't destroyed by the fifth century invasions-- and remember we said the Ostrogoths were pretty reasonable occupiers-- would be destroyed by the Romans themselves.

I will not tax you with the ins and outs, and ups and downs of this campaign. Suffice it to say that the general, Belisarius, at first was able to triumph in Italy. The Ostrogothic resistance, however, proved to be much stronger than he expected. And Justinian recalled Belisarius. Almost all of Italy was reoccupied by the Ostrogoths, and it was only the second general, Narses, who from 552 to 555 is able to take over Italy. 540 is the year that Ravenna falls to the Byzantines, and it seems to be the zenith of Justinian's reign. In that year, the Persians invaded. That perpetual peace had lasted nine years. And the Persian invasion was quite successful. It resulted in the sack of the largest city of the Empire after Constantinople and Alexandria, the city of Antioch in the Eastern Mediterranean.

And this was followed then by a plague. The so-called Justinianic Plague, which seems to be related, perhaps, to the plague of Peracles' Athens or the Athens of the Peloponnesian War, and maybe to the Black Death of 1348, 1349. Hard to say. And in fact, research now being done on the DNA in mass graves from that plague will perhaps tell us what the disease really was. Although so far, apparently, it hasn't. So from 540 to 565, the death of Justinian, his policies are officially successful. 555, the fall of Italy. The plague eventually goes away. The Persians are pushed out of Antioch, at least. But the Empire in the later years of Justinian is clearly staggering under the weight of taxation, economic downturn, declining population, and over-extension. They had conquered Italy, but the Italy they had conquered was ruined. And this empire, stretching now from Sicily to the Persian frontier is clearly too big to hold onto. So this is some of what Procopius' anger is about. But he's bitter and disillusioned. He says, ¡°But I grow dizzy when I write of such suffering. And pass on to future times it's memories.¡± Here, he's speaking about the Persian invasion of Antioch. ¡°For I cannot understand why it is the will of God to exalt the fortunes of a man, or place him and cast them down for no reason that we can see.¡±

Now if you contrast him with what you've read in Augustine, in The Confessions, you can see that Augustine has some reasons why this happens. Procopius resists the Christian explanation here. And this is led some observers to think, in general, that he's not really somehow a Christian. He is, but he's writing in a classical tradition.

And he is also, remember, an elitist, a conservative. I use the term ¡°elitist¡± in a fairly neutral sense. It's hard to expect someone whose writings come down to us all this length of time to be, somehow, an ordinary person. Yes, he represents a class. But doesn't really like religious controversy. But doesn't really like all of the fussing about the natures or nature of Christ. But there are other things that are not in Procopius that are somewhat surprising. Justinian is best known for architectural monuments like Hagia Sofia; to historians, for what we are essentially talking about today, the Western conquest; and for his legal reforms, the Justinianic Law Code, which is the basis of all European law. European, that is, as opposed to Anglo-American. Anglo-American law is a separate tradition. European law is based ultimately on a reworking of Roman law precedents.

Chapter 7: Justinian¡¯s Law Code, the Corpus Iuris Civilis [00:38:21]

And so I want to talk a little bit about his legal accomplishment, which Procopius, a man who would be familiar with law courts, with legal systems, doesn't tell us anything about in his works. Virtually nothing. Justinian essentially codified the Roman law. And this is important, not only because it's the basis of European law, but law is related to political and administrative order. However much we may hate bureaucracy, or denounce administration, that is how governments provide whatever it is they are providing for their citizens. And since the alternative to government is anarchy, and since there are examples before our eyes of anarchic societies, it won't do to underestimate the benefits of law, however cynical we may be about its implementation.

Roman law at the time of Justinian was, as law tends to be, learned and unwieldy. If you wanted to know how to resolve a question, you could go through the thousands and thousands of what are called ¡°responsae,¡± or you could look at legislation. Just as in the Anglo-American tradition, and some of you will learn this very soon in law school, you can either look at statutes passed by legislatures or court cases--precedents. The equivalent of a statute, Connecticut passes a law saying that you can't have a gun in your car. Whereas Texas has laws that say you could have a gun in your car under such and such circumstances, OK?

So you have a whole set of statute law, which would be imperial statutes in the Roman Empire, imperial legislation. Or, if the statutes don't cover a particular situation, or you want something that has the particularity--a tree on my property falls on my neighbor's--did I mention this already? Yeah, that one--on my neighbor's garage. Who's to blame? OK, you go and you say, well, this case came up in Cincinnati in 1949, and this is what the judge found. In the absence of computers, the search for this stuff is very hard.

In Anglo-American law this is called ¡°precedent¡±. In Roman law, they're called ¡°responsae¡±. And interestingly enough, this term is also singular, plural. It applies to Jewish law. A response is a response. A judge, an expert, a law professor, in effect, is asked his opinion on something. And his response becomes preserved as a kind of precedent. These were voluminous and represented centuries of law. And even more, of course, the responsae conflicted. One judge says, ¡°You have to pay because it was your tree.¡± Another says, ¡°It's an accident, he's responsible for his own remedies.¡±

What do you do if you have a conflict of judges? What would you do if you have two kinds of contradictory responses? You've got to decide who is more authoritative? Which one is better? So the work of Justinian's compilers was to sort out legislation, statutes, and the responses, and also to decide among contradictory ones.

What is in this law? Well, what's in any law? We think of law as having mostly to do with criminals and stuff like that. But criminal law is actually very simple. It's like the Burgundian code. If you murder someone, this is what's going to happen to you. There may be different kinds of killing. If you murder them with intent and premeditation, that's worse than if you murder them in a fight and spontaneously.

Manslaughter is different from murder. Manslaughter is where you didn't intend to kill the person, but you did. You punched him, and you didn't know they had a weak heart and he died. That's manslaughter. You punched them. You intended to hurt him, but you didn't intend to kill him, but he died. Vehicular manslaughter. What's the difference between negligence--you should have seen something and you didn't--versus criminal intent? You did it deliberately. But it's very simple, the criminal law. There aren't a whole lot of gray areas, and you can get through the criminal code pretty quickly.

But what about contracts? What about property? This is endless. This is endless. So you know in law school, criminal law will be the cream, or the tip of the proverbial iceberg, or some little side issue. Most of your time is going to be spent on--those of you who go for this option--on property and contracts. And that's what the Justinian law is mostly: property and contracts, legal arrangements for buying and selling, inheriting, partnerships, guardianships, security, surety, obligations. This is a very advanced science in Roman law. As advanced as it is anywhere, at any time. This is very different from ¡°You cut off one finger; you pay five solidi,¡± which we were looking at last week.

The work that ensued, the so-called Justinianic code, or the Corpus Iuris Civilis, the body of civil law, was drawn up in five years. Here, again, is an example of unbelievable rapidity, compared with the length of time it takes now, merely to reform the Connecticut tax code--the Connecticut traffic code, for that matter. It was undertaken by a commission.

Four books were issued. The first is a collection of statutes, and it's called the Codex. Collected laws of the Senate and imperial laws of previous centuries.

The largest book is the Digest, or in Latin, Digesta. The Digest is the weeded-out responsae, organized by subject. So this would be where you would go to try and figure out what happens if a river changes its course a little, and your land seems to be now taken over by your neighbor. Is the river the border, or is an artificial line the border?

The third book is a kind of textbook, or a survey of the whole law and what it's supposed to mean called the Institutes. And the fourth is called the Novella, or new laws, because obviously, new laws would have to be made. The Codex, the Digest, the Institutes are in Latin, because Latin was the language of the Roman Empire. But the Novella are in Greek, because Greek was the language of the Empire now. ¡°Now¡± being 534 when this work was finished.

The Justinianic Code is more, however, than a rearrangement of old laws. It displayed a consistent philosophy of government where law is more than precedent, is an active force in society. The Emperor is seen as the servant of the law, the implementer of the law, but he's also the master of the law. He is an absolute power. He is the embodiment of the law.

This is a well-run, immense, burdensome empire. Procopius gives us, unreliable though he may be as to Justinian being a demon, et cetera, Procopius gives us a vivid picture of a highly-governed, even efficiently-governed, but oppressively-governed and very ambitious society.

Now for next week, and a little bit after, remember we have no class on Wednesday. We have class on Monday. We are going to read from Gregory of Tours about Clovis and the Franks. And it will seem more violent and more primitive than what we've been reading. But violence and primitiveness, unfortunately, are part of history and government at almost any time. And so, enjoy the intrigue.

I'm not going to test you on the names. You'll see there are lots of great cat names of the Frankish barbarians. But pay attention to the figure of Clovis, and to the attitude of Gregory. Because, as with Procopius, we've got an interesting, if not completely reliable source.

Lecture 10 - Clovis and the Franks [October 3, 2011]

Chapter 1: Gregory of Tours and Procopius as historians [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Gregory of Tours. Here we enter further into a stranger world. As I told you at the outset of the course, it begins fairly reasonably, as if it's another history course with great powers, states, recognizable theories of government, and practices of government. Now we're into what certainly seems like a combination of thugs and miracles. And I hope that you'll see, if you haven't seen already, that far from being contradictory, thugs and miracles go together, historically.

We've already entered into a somewhat strange realm with Procopius. Procopius' Secret History certainly is a strange story, with strange theories of causality and a strange cast of characters. But it is narrated in a high classical style. Insofar as the pieces are a bit jumbled, it's because it wasn't completed. But, as you will have seen, if you think about Procopius, he is easy to read because he's leading you on. He has several points to make, and he makes them with great rhetorical power. His Secret History is in the classical tradition of the invective. And in a way, we are better able to understand this because our own political discourse has gotten much more crude and extreme in the last thirty years or so.

So political invective, historical invective, stylistically well-composed, is not unfamiliar to us. But Gregory of Tours is. In a way, I've cheated by giving you the assignment from this edition of Alexander Murray, because he rearranges and excerpts things. The full work is much fatter, and Murray tries to make the story fairly coherent with headings, grouping things together, explaining a little what's going on, to say nothing of the nice maps and genealogical tables in the back. But that loses some of the random quality-- or seemingly random quality-- that Gregory has. He has this funny way of seeming to move from one thing to another without any kind of transition or for no apparent purpose.

So in one of the little sections of Book 3 that's not in Murray, he's telling us now we have a miracle: "There lived at the city of Langres, Saint Gregory, that priest of God famed far and wide for his miracles and virtuous deeds. While I am talking about this bishop, I thought you would like me to tell you something of the town of Dijon, where he spent his youth." Well, wait a minute. Did I ask about Dijon? Do I even know where Dijon is? Weren't we talking about Theuderic and Chlothar and their feud? How have we gotten into, first of all, a story of a saint, and second, a little travelogue about Dijon?

So that is Gregory. You've got to like this. And I think we are better equipped¡ªyou, especially-- because we're not so linear as we used to be. You know, magazines used to be just a set of articles, and that was it. And then about twenty years ago, they started just breaking up into these miscellaneous things with little observations, and here's what's happening in Wichita Falls. But, you know, I don't live there. But so what? You know, food festival in Colorado Springs, and what about this train trip in New Zealand? Well, I'm not in New Zealand, either. You know what I mean. This kind of little offers from all over the place, little possibilities, observations, wit and wisdom. This is the experience of modern media.

So I wouldn't say that Gregory is ahead of his time, but I don't want you to complain to me-- well, I mean, you can, but I will not be incredibly sympathetic with, "Wait, I don't know where this stops and begins." Or "Wait, are we responsible for Theodebert versus Theuderic?" The answer to that is "No." I'm not going to give you a short answer about which of these names is best for your cat. [laughter]

Or, you know, name at least five of Clovis' grandchildren. But the rhythm of this, the power of these rulers, their thuggery or their violence, their internecine violence, their respect for miracles, Gregory's sense of God's intervention, is very important to grasp. And we will talk about the actual historical importance of this people that Gregory chronicles, the Franks. The chief thing about the Franks from Gregory's point of view is that they are Catholic Christians. They never-- unlike almost all other of the invaders of the Roman Empire-- they never go through a period of Arianism. Clovis converts from paganism to regular-guy Roman Christianity. And from Clovis' point of view, that is what is of chief importance-- from Gregory's point of view.

Chapter 2: Gregory of Tours, the Author and his Writings [00:06:17]

Gregory of Tours, the author, is writing in the late sixth century. So around the same time, a few decades later, perhaps, than Procopius. Gregory lived from 539 to 594. In his time, there was still a distinction between Romans and barbarians, and Gregory was very conscious of himself as a Roman. He was from a distinguished Roman senatorial family. Note that he uses the word "senatorial," a rank of the Roman Empire, even though the Roman Empire, from our point of view, certainly hasn't existed for a hundred years or so.

He notes that eighteen bishops of Tours, his see--of the eighteen bishops of Tours, all but five were related to him. That shows you that being a bishop was a Roman office, an elite Roman office, even in the barbarian period. And also you'll see that Gregory's behavior shows us that the bishops, to some extent, have inherited Roman offices and Roman responsibilities. They are part of the government, and in a sense, opposed to the more brutal aspects of Merovingian, Frankish government.

Gregory became bishop of Tours in 573, and so he was bishop for twenty-one years. He probably began writing this book-- which is actually just called The Book of the Histories--shortly after his election. So he's writing in the 570s to early 590s.

He begins Book 1, which we haven't read, with the story of creation and takes it to the death of Saint Martin, the great patron of Tours. And then he begins, properly speaking, with at least the legendary history of the dynasty of the Frankish kings, the descendants of a certain Merovech, hence Merovingians, the name for this dynasty.

Gregory also wrote a number of saints' lives and martyr stories. He was very attached to Saint Martin. At one point, in one of those episodes not in Murray, he says, "If you celebrate the feast of Saint Martin faithfully, you will gain the protection of the saintly bishop in this world and the next." And indeed, that's very important. Remember when Clovis-- and this is in Murray, on the page 17-- when Clovis decides he's going to attack the Visigoths? Now, he says he's attacking them because he can't stand to have Arians occupying Gaul, which is on page 16. "Then Clovis said to his men, 'I take it very badly that these Arians hold part of Gaul. With God's help, let's go and conquer them, and bring the land under His authority.'¡± And a soldier seizes hay from a poor peasant. This is just the way soldiers are. They need that hay, the civilian has the hay, they're on the march, he grabs it.

But this peasant is on the lands of Saint Martin, of land belonging to Tours. And the king, thug though he is, has issued an order saying the troops were not to take anything except fodder and water. And in fact, sort of hay is fodder. Nevertheless, "the king, who quicker than it takes to say it, had him put to the sword." Guy, you've made a mistake. And he's killed. And Clovis says of this incident, "How shall there be hope of victory, if we offend the blessed Martin?"

So you've got to take seriously, if you want to call it superstition, fine. But the Frankish rulers are at least amenable to influence from the priests, bishops, guardians of the saints. And notice-- because we're going to come back to this a lot. You're going to see it everywhere in the early Middle Ages, post-Roman world-- the saint is not dead. It's not like Martin is some just kind of presence, the way, you know, the happy dead who are indifferent to us. Martin is an angry saint, or potentially angry.

In fact, all saints worth anything in the early Middle Ages are very touchy. If you seize hay from land belonging to their church, they'll strike you dead, or they will see to it that you die in battle. And Gregory is indeed full of incidents in which holy figures, alive or dead, have this kind of ability to mobilize supernatural power.

What is his historical model? I mean if Procopius, in The Wars, models himself after Thucydides, and if in the Secret History he models himself after a tradition of invective, what is Gregory's model? We don't really know his sources. One reason why he's so important is that for an awful lot of the history of the Merovingians, he's about all we have. And although disorganized--quote "disorganized" -- from our point of view, he's very detailed. But he does have a model, and that model is the Bible, the Hebrew Bible or the Old Testament. If you read the Old Testament, it is, as I think I've said before, full of violence and full of miracles. And they are sort of jumbled up. The hand of God is very apparent in the Bible. And generally speaking, those who disobey God are punished.

The same is true in Gregory, although the hand of God is a little more mediated by those holy figures-- saints, hermits, bishops-- that we just discussed. There is a little bit more of a priestly power, but then again, the Bible has figures like Moses, who are able to-- Joshua, who's able to stop the sun. Priestly figures, indeed.

So from Gregory's point of view, there is a continuity between biblical history and the history of his times. He describes, in the prologue to Book 2-- which is not in Murray-- that his plan is to describe the holy deeds of the saints and the way in which whole races of people were butchered. OK, you got a problem with that? At least the second part we all know is what history's about. It's the first that's a little tough, the holy deeds of the saints.

And particularly as they're not off on the side. The popular imagination loves what might be called "holy deeds of the saints." If you look at gossip magazines of the lower sort, or kind of internet folklore, weird births, raining frogs, space aliens, all sorts of supernatural events clog them. Along with stars-- that is, movie stars or media stars¡ªgossip, and a little bit of history, a little bit of current events. This is not so dissimilar, in that sense.

Gregory is both a historian and a political actor. He does not have either the luxury or the irrelevance of most historians now, who sit comfortably-- or in my case, not very comfortably, since I'm in an unrenovated office-- but comfortably enough [laughter] in universities and maybe comment on what's going on. No. Gregory is very, very involved with the Merovingian rulers.

And he has to display courage. He refuses to surrender fugitives who have sought asylum in his cathedral when they are demanded by royal officials. He defends his fellow bishop, Praetextatus, who was accused by the king of treason. You'll be reading about this for next week. He'll have arguments, again in your reading for next week, with the king himself about the Trinity, and has to defend himself against the charge of slandering the king's concubine-- really, here, the word "concubine" isn't quite right, because these kings are kind of polygamists-- against the king's favorite, Fredegund. And Gregory is tried for defaming her. He resists taxes.

He seems to have been a small man. He suffered ill health, or at least he took an inordinate interest in his own health. He was a great believer in potions made with dust from the relics and tombs of holy men. A medicine prescribed as potio de pulvere? sepulchre,? a potion made from sepulcher dust. But it's got to be of the right kind of people.

Chapter 3: Gregory of Tours on the Franks [00:17:00]

What is his attitude towards the Franks? I've said he regards them as thugs and barbarians. But at the same time, he regards them as the people of Israel, reborn as a race favored by God.

The Franks claimed-- or at least their spokespersons, their learned spokespersons-- claimed to be descended from refugees of fallen Troy. Thus, like the Romans. In fact, we don't really know anything about them until they appear in Roman sources in the third century. We don't know what held them together. We're back to this problem of ethnogenesis. Do they speak a common language? Do they just travel in a pack together? Do they regard themselves as a people having a common ancestor? Well, we don't really know.

Constantine's father, at the end of the third century, dealt with them and settled them in what's now the Low Countries, Holland and Belgium. They were federati, which you remember means allied armies of the Empire. They served the Empire actually fairly loyally in the early fourth century, and they became rich doing so.

We don't really know if the supposed ancestors of Clovis-- Merovech himself, for example-- were real or legendary. Supposedly, Merovech is Clovis' grandfather. We don't know if he existed. But we do know something about his father, Chilperic. Well, it's a chalkless day, so the guy's name is Chilperic: C-H-I-L-P-E-R-I-C. We know about him because his grave was dug up in the seventeenth century. Unfortunately, all the stuff that was in his grave, most of it was stolen in 1831. But drawings had been made before that, and they show that he owned or was buried with a cloak embroidered with cicadas, a crystal globe, a gold bracelet, a Frankish amulet. His horse¡¯s -- well, we assume it was his horse's head buried with him, and it was covered with precious metal. He was also buried with 100 gold coins and 200 silver ones. And a signet ring that shows him with long hair, and the ring is inscribed-- in case we wondered who this was-- King Chilperic.

The long hair is important. It is a symbol of the power of these rulers. It is a kind of dynastic charisma. And indeed, one of the best books about these rulers, by an English historian is called Long Haired Kings.

What is all this stuff? The stuff that's buried with him? A lot of it comes from Byzantium. A lot of this would have been bribes or goodwill gestures by the emperors interested in keeping some nominal loyalty on the part of the barbarian tribes in the collapse of the Western Empire.

Clovis succeeded Chilperic, his father, as the head of this federated tribe of now a nonexistent empire. All that remains of the Empire is a Roman commander. Remember we mentioned, in the life of Saint Antoninus of Noricum,? that an emissary was sent from the Roman army to try to get paid and discovered that the Empire no longer existed. That there was nobody to pay them. Syagrius, S-Y-A-G-R-I-U-S, is a little bit like this. He's a general in northern Gaul of the Roman Empire, and now that the Roman Empire ceases to exist, he's on his own. And he is a rival for Clovis, and one of the first targets of his expansion.

Gregory calls him ¡°king of the Romans.¡± What does that mean? Rome didn't have kings. We don't really know what title he used. We have no documents from him, no coins. Probably Byzantium, the eastern Roman Empire, didn't like him, and probably they supported Clovis. At any rate, he was killed in 486, and Clovis' next target of expansion was the Visigoths, those Arians that Gregory tells us about in the passage that I mentioned to you just a little while ago.

What kind of personality does Clovis have? Have we met his type before? Is there any difference? Anybody have a sense of him? How does he strike you? Just another one of these characters of the early Middle Ages, or is there's something unusual?

Student: Killing off everybody, including his family members?

Professor Paul Freedman: He kills off everybody, including his family members. Yeah, yeah. This is, unfortunately, not unusual. And why?

Student: He doesn't want any family member to lay claim to--

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah, wouldn't you think he'd be dynastically conscious? Constantius, the Emperor in the fourth century, did the same thing. Only his nephews, Gallus and Julian, survived, and indeed, Julian defeated him.

Chapter 4: Clovis and Christianity [00:23:31]

Is he, then, just the same kind of violent character, or randomly violent character? Is there a plan besides expansion? At least in Gregory's portrayal?

Student: Christianity.

Professor Paul Freedman: Sorry?

Student: Christianity, forcing conversion.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah, yeah. He is Christian. Christianity. He doesn't force conversion, but he himself converts and his men with him. We know his piety even before the conversion, because of this incident with the silver liturgical bowl, or ewer. Right? On page 7 and 8, in 227?

Student: The story seems dubious.

Professor Paul Freedman: The story seems dubious. The story being that they plundered this church, the Church of Rheims. The bishop asks Clovis for this silver bowl to be returned. Clovis says he's got to consult his men, because they have a kind of booty splitting muster. Notice that this shows a certain leader/follower relationship, rather than absolute ruler/follower relationship.

Clovis says to his men something on the order of "me hardies," or "my good men." "Me hardies" maybe is a little too pirate-like. "So," he begins. "So I want that ewer to return it to the Church in addition to my share of half." And one soldier says, "No, you get half of that, just like everything else. Takes out his axe, one of the important weapons of the Franks, and splits the silver thing in half. And Clovis doesn't do anything immediately. In a later muster, he says to the guy, recognizing him, "Your kit is a mess. Your shield, you call that a shield?" And he knocks something down, and as the guy picks it up, Clovis takes up his own axe and splits the guy's head. Saying as he does so, "Thus you did to my ewer, or my basin, in Soissons."

Yeah, dubious story, but interesting because it shows both the power of the ruler and some limitations, as well as his type of piety. Power--actually, you know, the president of the United States actually does have the power to kill people. We've seen it in action. Though at a distance and under certain, very special circumstances. But basically, it takes a certain kind of ruler to be able to kill someone outright like that. It still happens, but we're talking about people like Qaddafi or despots.

So certainly, as with killing the guy who stole the hay from Saint Martin's land, Clovis is following a certain set of leadership tips that basically amounts to winning by maximum intimidation, I think it's fair to say.

But he's got to do this in a careful way, because his followers are very important. They are powerful. He does depend on them, and he's got to give at least the impression of being the leader of a band and not the kind of ruler of the state that we might be more familiar with. Leadership is personal, but there's a kind of tribal sense, or tribal sense of democracy.

The other thing about the story, of course, is once again the controversy is over piety towards things of the Church, even before Clovis has, at least according to Gregory, officially converted. It's not that you should be nice to the Church because it's good to be a nice person. It's that you've got to be nice to the Church because the Church is in command of supernatural weapons that will overcome the weapons of this world. The supernatural interpenetrates the physical or historical at every point in Gregory's narrative. So the overwhelming fact for Gregory, as I said before, is that he is orthodox, or Catholic, i.e., not Arian.

Clovis is, in Gregory's eyes, the new Constantine. Someone who has miraculously been turned, thuggish though he is-- and Constantine was, as well-- to advance God's work. Of course, Gregory regards him as a barbarian, and he shows him as a barbarian. He portrays him honestly, or at least unflatteringly. As was said, he murdered his family. And then moreover, if you remember on pages 19 and 20, he pretends to be really sorry that he can't find anybody that he's related to. He's searching findmyfamily.com for a genealogy or high school classmates. Anybody who could be his friend. But in fact, he is just searching them out to kill them. And he's got all sorts of tricks to kill his relatives.

Nevertheless, in the same chapter that describes his trick on Cloderic, Gregory tells us, "Having aquired the kingdom of Sigibert and its treasury, he also received those people under his dominion. For daily the Lord laid his enemies low under his hand and increased his kingdom, because he walked before Him with an upright heart and did what was pleasing in His sight." Right? This is just after Clovis, after the death of Sigibert, calls all the people together, says, "I don't know what happened, but the sons of Sigibert seem to have died as they were showing my envoy's treasure. Here's my proposal, make me king." And they say, "Oh, OK. Great, yeah. Step on the shield and we'll lift you up, just like the Roman emperors. "

Is Gregory a comedian? Or is he saying-- and I think this is more likely, although he is hilarious to read. I mean, I hope he's amused you. I hope while you were cursing me for giving you this assignment, or at least praying to some saints to strike me dumb or erupt in boils or probably not anything very strong, like you'll notice that occasionally people lose their intestines when they go to the bathroom. Probably not. The heretic Arias, for example, and others who betray the saints. Anyway, whatever curses you were summoning up to me, I hope you actually found this fun. This course is fun, as I think I told you way back in the beginning of September.

So apart from the fun angle, people are instruments of the Lord, and they walk in the sight of the Lord even if they are not themselves good people. The Lord makes use of instruments, of people who are forceful. It's important to be forceful. If Clovis was a nice guy-- and we'll see, and have already seen some examples of rulers who were nice, often intellectual, and ineffectual. Gregory prefers effectual with some violent touches to ineffectual, because being a ruler is a hard job in a barbarian world, in a fallen world.

Gregory, in this sense, is like Augustine. The world has fallen. The world is corrupt. There are no good people in power. And if they are in power, it is either unusual or they're not going to be in power for long. Therefore, it is important to be violent. It is important to be able to intimidate your troops. It is important to seek out those who would oppose you. And if they've got to be killed, they've got to be killed.

The reason for this is that the work of the Lord has to be advanced, according to Gregory, and the Church has to be protected. For Gregory is exemplifying what I said would happen as predicted by Saint Augustine. The Empire might cease, but the Church would not. The Church would deal with whatever successors came up, be they Arian, or preferably not. Be they cultivated, or more likely barbarian. And as barbarian leaders go, Clovis and his sons were not so bad.

We're not really sure how Clovis converted. Because Gregory is invested in a story that likens Clovis to Constantine, we have the same kind of thing. Before a battle, he makes a deal with God that if he wins the battle, he will convert. We don't really know if he was converted before this battle in 494, as Gregory reports, or maybe in a battle against the Visigoths in 506. But it doesn't really matter.

It's very important that the Arians be defeated. He's got a story that's not in Murray, in Book 2, Chapter 23, in which an Arian bishop named Cryola. C-R-Y-O-L-A. Cryola, not crayola. Cryola. Cryola is angry because he sees the Catholic bishops performing miracles all over the place. So he pays a guy to pretend to be blind, and then to greet him as he comes to Church, and beg him to heal his sight, and then to say, "Oh my gosh, I've been healed. I can see." But God punishes this by making him actually blind, at this point. And then the guy, very helpfully from the Catholic point of view, said "Oh, I wasn't blind. This evil bishop, Cryola, bribed me in order to pretend to be blind, but now God and his saints, Saint Martin in particular, have punished me. " And so that it takes a Catholic bishop to heal him back to sight.

So this is Gregory's attitudes towards the Arians. On the other hand, he does report that the Franks besieged Saragossa. This is on pages 41, 42. The Spanish city of Saragossa. They've gotten that far in their attacks on the Visigoths. But the Arians were able to fight them off. "They circled the walls carrying the tunic of Saint Vincent and singing psalms. With the women dressed in black, their hair hanging loose, covered in ashes, lamented. Seeing the situation, Theodebert returned. He gave up the siege." The Arians may be heretics, but they've got the tunic of Saint Vincent. And the power of that relic is so great that even in the hands of miscreants, it's not to be opposed. Saint Vincent, a very important saint and the patron of Saragossa.

So the Arians are fakes, but they are not completely without spiritual power, either. And this is a kind of universe in which there are natural and supernatural forces. And it's not that one trumps the other, exactly, but that they both have to be taken into account.

So, Clovis consolidates a large kingdom in most of what would become France. Roman Gaul, medieval France. France named after this group, the Franks. The Visigoths now were pushed out into Spain and just that part of France bordering on Spain.

Clovis received the favor of the Church because he was Catholic. His conversion, let's say around 500, is ninety years before the Visigoths become Catholic. And this aids him greatly, because the Church is in possession of learned people, financial resources, and spiritual power. So we follow the Franks-- and we will follow them up through Charlemagne and his successors-- because they are successful, and because their own self-consciousness is as the rightful rulers of the former Western Empire. A claim that in various generations is more or less of a reality and that is by no means inevitable, but is something that they will eventually make good on. For the time being, Clovis considers himself a representative of the Byzantine Empire, but a representative who very conveniently doesn't have to do anything. The Byzantine Emperor sends him the title of consul. He's very pleased at this, but it doesn't bind him, really.

So much for Clovis. Establishment of Frankish hegemony. The prominence of the Franks in the post-Roman West. The first Catholic people among the barbarian invaders.

Chapter 5: The Sons of Clovis [00:39:48]

Now we turn briefly to his sons. He divided his kingdom equally, and you have a map in the back that shows the division of the realm under Clovis' sons, Chlothar, Childebert, Chlodomer, and Theuderic. This practice of division is dangerous. It is usually a better idea to give it to one son, because then you don't divide the kingdom. On the other hand, if you have four sons who are all militarily competent, they're going to fight with each other. And in fact they fight with each other, as Gregory describes in Book 3, even though they've been given divisions.

The violence of Clovis' sons is crude and even ludicrous. So for example, this awful incident of Chlodomer's sons being protected by Clovis' queen Chlothild. And her sons, the boys' uncles, Chlothar and Theuderic, invite the boys to come for a visit. And Chlothild, who seems rather credulous, says, "Great idea!." Once they are in the power of these two brothers, who of course like Clovis want to kill their relatives, particularly their younger relatives, they send a sword and a pair of scissors, right? "Which will it be," the messenger asks the queen. "Cut off their hair or kill them?" Cutting off their hair will symbolize that they're no longer eligible for rulership. And it may lead to them being put away in a monastery or something like that, but they're taking early retirement. They're twelve, fourteen years old, but they've had it

And Chlothild is so angry, at least according to Gregory, that she says she'd rather see them die. And then they kill them. They kill them in this ludicrous way, because one of them gets cold feet, and the other is furious and takes up the sword, and just kills them. Even though they're begging. I mean, it's a rather gruesome scene.

Meanwhile, in a scene that we haven't got in Murray's edition, Theuderic attempts to kill Chlothar. He invites him, and he's got men waiting to ambush him, but the cloth isn't low enough down. They're sort of behind a partition, a cloth partition, but Chlothar can see their feet. And so he kind of turns back and starts to walk out of the hall. And then Theuderic says, "No, no, no, I just invited you to give you a gift." And he gives him a silver goblet or something like that. So, Chlothar escapes from this, but Theuderic is so angry at having been tricked that he then sends a messenger saying it was a mistake to give back the goblet. So, I mean, these guys, what can I say?

Yet beneath the barbarian acts is a society that is still being governed fairly closely. There is a fairly sophisticated administration still. There's a gold coinage, which takes a lot of resources to maintain. These rulers are collecting taxes, and they are collecting taxes according to written records. There's public land. There's revenue from land belonging to the king. The kings are reasonably conscientious about the appointment of bishops.

What is Gregory's attitude towards these sons of Clovis? He certainly portrays them as fratricidal. Nevertheless, on page 26, he tells us that the brothers were endowed with great courage and had considerable military resources. Once again, their power is directed more for good than for bad. And a lot of their power for bad is merely directed at each other. He considers them, in other words, appropriate rulers for savage times.

At one point, two of the brothers make war against a third. Specifically, Childebert and Theuderic against Chlothar. Chlothar is the guy who has just been depicted by Gregory as the tough one, the one who killed the two nephews. He's also an adulterer. And yet, faced with his brother's armies, he prays to God. And his mother, Queen Chlothild, prays to Saint Martin. So powerful are these prayers that the two brothers are unsuccessful. A hailstorm pelts their troops, spares Chlothar, and Chlothar is victorious. The brothers do not succeed in dislodging him.

Here then, we have the power of the Merovingians and the limitations on that power. The limitations are partly military, partly that of fratricidal intrigue, of people getting killed. But they're also partly supernatural. And as you read further into the grandsons of Clovis, people whom Gregory himself has dealings with, particularly the wayward Chilperic, you'll see rulers that Gregory considers to be evil and rulers who are really falling away from the example. But what interests us in our readings for next week is the nature of this society. What's holding it together if it's rulers are so violent? Why is it not just falling apart into fragments and shattering? How could this dynasty rule over a polity for something on the order of 250 years?

Have fun with the papers, have fun with Gregory, and we'll talk next week. Thanks.

Lecture 11 - Frankish Society [October 10, 2011]

Chapter 1: What Holds Society Together? [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freeman: So today is an exciting day, because the papers are due, because the midterm is soon, but most of all, because we're finishing up our talk on the Merovingians. Questions? Comments? Cat names?

So the Merovingians. Remember that the reason we're studying them is as an example of barbarian kingship, barbarian states, and the post-Roman world. "Post-Roman" meaning that the Roman Empire is gone, but the society is not completely severed. Its connections with the Roman tradition are not severed. This is most obvious in the Church and the survival of Latin learning, bishops, Christianity, literacy. But even though we seem to be in an environment of rather primitive, and even, we could use the word loosely, barbarian kings, I hope that we'll see that within Gregory's narrative, there is evidence of a kind of royal administration and a certain sense of purpose.

We are entering a period in which we have to start asking, "what held society together?" This becomes a question when two things start to fail. One is the government. Where it's really not clear that there is a government, other than powerful people plundering less powerful people. And the other factor is when the people themselves don't really believe that there is any force holding their society together, anything that they unconsciously give deference to.

So we're all familiar with what are called now "failed states." That is, polities that have an official existence, but that cannot seem to keep the most basic form of order within their borders, whatever those borders may be. So unfortunate states like Somalia, or no longer, but ten years ago, Liberia, Sierra Leone, were examples of failed states. And this is a phenomenon that has grown in the contemporary world.

In the Middle Ages-- and here we're talking about the period from the collapse of Roman authority in the West in the fifth century until at least the twelfth century-- there are various kinds of societies that are held together. They're not as anarchic as Somalia, actually. But they are not held together by government in the sense that we understand it. They are held together partly by informal social networks and ties. Things like kinship, family, private vengeance, religion.

But by having to ask the question "What holds society together?" you are already making a kind of statement about the sort of society you're talking about. I would say that the United States has, for most of its history, been a polity in which this kind of question didn't have to be asked. It's not that people loved the government, or even particularly deferred to it. But that in their everyday life, in their everyday gestures and in their everyday assumptions, they assumed that they were protected. They normally did not have to go out with a weapon in order to feel that they would not be robbed. There are exceptional communities where that's not been true.

But generally speaking, you could assume that the police or the police forces intimidated criminals or potential evildoers. You would, you know, send your bills in by mail, assuming that they would arrive, that a government agency would take care of the transport of them. You might try not to pay as much taxes as you perhaps owed, but you wouldn't really try to just be under the radar of the government, because you would assume that you couldn't do that. You would have to make some kind of tax payment. And on and on. Educating your children, signing up for Social Security, being part of a community.

The mark of privilege, then, historically, is not having to think about the ties that hold your society together. If you had to come up with a standard with which to measure human happiness, that might not be such a bad one.

Now, there are other forms of human happiness. Total independence. The idea of the person who lives out somewhere on the farm and is completely self-sufficient, has all of the food that they need, either that they catch or cultivate, lives in some kind of wonderful climate in which the food grows on trees. Dreams of authors of the nineteenth century in Europe and America about the South Sea Islanders.

So we have in our imagination the idea of living a blissful life without any particular social ties, or only the most casual ones. But I think we all know that usually, such an existence, when it, in fact, exists at all, is an invitation for someone else to plunder it and to steal it. Part of the reason for social ties is company. Part of the reason for social ties is protection.

So when asking what held Barbarian societies together, we're asking something that's more than just a banal question of medieval sociology. We're asking a question about the fundamental nature of a society that is not so unsuccessful as people think. You know, again, nobody wakes up in 560 AD saying how unfortunate it is that they're alive in the Dark Ages. They didn't call it the Dark Ages. They didn't think it was the Dark Ages. And it wasn't the Dark Ages, I hope to show.

Chapter 2: Gregory of Tours [00:07:20]

Now, Gregory of Tours is a great source because he gives a lot of very miscellaneous information. He's perhaps a source who likes violence, though. He likes violence for reasons we were talking about last week. He wants to show that on the one hand, the life of human beings is terrible and full of outrage and violence, but that it is redeemed by God's solicitude. And that those people who recognize God's power, as manifested through bishops, saints, the rites of the church, will, if not prosper always in this life, at least receive a reward that is commensurate with their loyalty to God.

Gregory is a pessimist. One of the reasons-- one of the themes that guides this work-- I was going to say one of the reasons he wrote this work, but I don't want to kind of venture that far out. One of the aspects that unites this work is a sense of the decline of the Franks, from the model, Clovis, to the fools that he feels he has to deal with, like Chilperic. Three generations-- the generation of Clovis, the generation of Clovis's sons, the generation of Clovis's grandsons. Each one worse than the one before it.

So if he had grudgingly acknowledged that the sons of Clovis fulfilled, in some sense, a mission in accord with God's plan, he was much more clearly hostile to this third generation of Merovingian leaders. He says at one point in a part that is not in Murray, "To this day, one is still amazed and astonished at the disasters which befell these people." And I think I mentioned this little passage before. "We can only contrast how their forefathers used to behave, and how they themselves are behaving today."

So he is scolding the current generation and exalting the older ways. He is scolding them for their violence. But what about the fact that, as we emphasized, Clovis was violent? What he's really scolding them for, then, is not violence as such, but violence channeled to unproductive ends. Violence is inevitable, in Gregory's world. Violence in defense of the true faith is not only acceptable, but necessary in order to defend that.

And Gregory's interest, as I hope I'll show, in the true faith, is not just a defense of Christianity as a religion, but Christianity as the thing that holds society together. If you asked Gregory what holds society together, he would give some kind of answer on the order of the bishops, the saints, the supernatural, the Church. And then if you said, "Well, what is the role of the king in this?" It's basically to terrorize people. To make sure that the mere threat of divine vengeance is backed up by threats of a more immediate sort. Throughout the history of the Franks, although not excerpted so much in the edition we're using, there are examples of people who hold God, Saint Martin, or the bishop, or some other saint in contempt, and who pay for it, often with their lives.

So in Gregory's official presentation of events, any defiance of God is met with a thunderbolt. But he's not actually a fool. I know in the dark moments of 2 AM, reading Gregory, that thought may have crossed your mind. And I know that you repressed it very quickly, and it's evil of me even to raise it.

But lest you think that he's just a credulous guy who lived in the sixth century AD and whatever, he is perceptive, and he understands that most people, most of the time, thunderbolt of God notwithstanding, need something a little more immediate to whip them into shape. That is, to follow a kind of basic civil order. And that is supposed to be the ruler. So it's fine for the ruler to be violent. And it's even OK if some people get caught in the jaws of the state, if we can call it that, or let's say, the jaws of the king, who should not have been punished.

Chapter 3: The Bishops and the King [00:12:27]

But look at the people he's dealing with. He's dealing with people who were violent, as well as kind of silly and quixotic. He has this little conversation with Chilperic that reminds one of pseudo-learned people, bloodthirsty dictators with pseudo-learning, on the order of Muammar Gaddafi. People who sort of study some stuff, and decide that they're experts on it because they're able to terrorize their population.

"So Chilperic issued a circular"-- this is on page 111-- "a circular to the effect that the Holy Trinity was to refer not to distinct persons, but only God. That it's unseemly for God to be called a person, like a mortal of flesh and blood. He also declared that the Father is the same as the Son, and the Holy Spirit is the same as the Father and Son." Well, you know, people had died, and they certainly had written huge controversial works, and had lots of councils over this issue. And this is not right. Nobody actually really believes this in Christianity.

"This is how it appeared the prophets and patriarchs, he said, and this is how the law itself proclaimed Him." Meaning Christ. And he then tells Gregory, "OK. This is the law I want you and the other members of the church to believe." And Gregory said, "Give up this false belief. You must observe the doctrines passed onto us by other teachers of the Church, who followed in the footsteps of the apostles, the teaching furnished by Hilary and Eusebius, and the confession you yourself made at baptism."

He's got to say this. I mean, he is very courageous to say this to the king. But the king-- it is like somebody who is extremely powerful denying very basic scientific facts. Stalin tried to impose the biological theories of Lysenko, which basically went against the consensus of evolutionary biology at the time. So this kind of pseudo-learning is a feature of people who, since they're being acclaimed as geniuses and as leaders, assume that their expertise carries over to all sorts of fields.

Well, the king grows angry. He says, "It's quite obvious that I regard Hilary and Eusebius as my bitterest opponents on this issue." Not only have Saints Hilary and Eusebius been dead for years, but they're saints, they're theologians. You know, it would be like me saying, "Well, obviously Charlemagne and Clovis are my enemies." A statement that is ridiculous.

And note Gregory's response: "It would suit you better to watch out you do not make God or his saints angry." And that could really serve as one of the themes of the entire work. "For you should know that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are all distinct in person." And then he goes on to the theological justification.

And then the king's response is, "I'm going to find some people smarter than you are." And Gregory says, "Such a person will not be smarter, but an idiot. Anyone who wants to follow what you propose would be an idiot." "Grinding his teeth at this response, he said, no more." And another bishop is consulted. So the king gives this up. And then he starts writing a treatise on the alphabet and wants to add some letters, and tells the teachers that the educational system needs to be modified to include these letters.

Well, I go into this digression to show you, first of all, Chilperic actually is literate. He is actually educated. He's at least educated enough to have half-baked ideas, and that's more than some kings of this time and later will be. He tried writing poetry, as well. He also tried to depose Gregory as bishop, which is in some later books.

Chapter 4: The Basis of Merovingian Power [00:16:39]

Who are these people, then? What is the basis of their power? The kingship is, in large measure, based on inherited status. The Merovingian family had an aura of sacredness and prestige that made it impossible to conceive of anybody not of their bloodline ruling. This power is partly the prestige of Clovis, who is seen as really the father of his people, bringing them into what would become France, or the Land of the Franks, and converting to Christianity.

But a lot of the prestige is what might be called "pre-Christian." The long hair. The riding around in carts, four-wheeled carts. And we've seen that the long hair is quite crucial. Once it's cut in a humiliating manner, the representative of the family loses some crucial kind of prestige.

Remember that choice presented to Queen Clotilde: the scissors or the sword. You want your grandchildren scalped, or at least, given a military haircut, or-- actually, a monastic haircut, in this context -- or do you want them killed? And she is so angry at this that she, in fact, says "killed." That shows you, at least, the humiliation that is involved in this haircutting.

These kings also practice something on the order of polygamy. They are Christians, but they are still tribal leaders in a society in which the possession of the women, in the plural, is a sign of status. One passage that describes a number of different things fairly usefully is on page 58. And this is the marriage. And again, it seems random when you're reading through it, but then that's the point of lecture, is to highlight the seemingly random, isn't it.

On page 58, Chilperic's wives: "Chilperic asks for Brunhilda"-- this other, Visigothic queen of one of his brothers-- "asks for the hand of her sister, Galswinthe, although he already had several wives." OK. So he promises the envoy he will put away the other wives. He will renounce them, and he will be married only to Galswinthe. And so with these assurances, her father sent his daughter, as he had send the first, along with a great deal of wealth. This is what's called a dowry, D-O-W-R-Y, a payment made by the bride's family to the groom.

"When she came to King Chilperic, she was received with great honor and made his wife. And, for the time being, his love for her was considerable, for she had brought great treasure." OK. It's not a, you know, a "we both like horseback riding" kind of relationship, although they probably did.

"But because of his love for Fredegunde"-- who is another wife, a low-status wife, a wife who didn't bring him much money, but who was mesmerizing, or beautiful, or certainly had a hold over him. "Because of his love for Fredegunde, whom he had before, a disgraceful conflict arose to divide them. Galswinthe had already been converted to the Catholic creed." That is, she had been a Visigothic princess raised as an Arian. She's now been converted.

"She complained to the king of the wrongs that she constantly had to endure, and said that he no respect for her. Finally, she asked him to give her her freedom to return to her native land if she left the treasures that she had brought him."

Which seems like a reasonable deal. "But he made up various excuses, he mollified her with sweet words, and in the end, he had her strangled by a slave, and he himself found the corpse on the bed."

Why didn't he just let her go, keeping the treasure? Um, humiliating, probably. Better to kill her. Why didn't he do what he said he did? You know, he's a barbarian ruler.

"After her death, God revealed a great sign of his power. A lamp burned before her tomb, suspended by a cord. Without anyone touching it, the cord broke, and the lamp fell to the pavement. The hard pavement gave way before it, and the lamp, as it had landed on some kind of soft substance, was buried in the middle and not all broken. To those who saw it, this did not happen without a great miracle."

Well, as miracles go in Gregory of Tours, this is pretty pedestrian. A freak accident. The lamp breaks, the exterior breaks, but the actual lamp part does not. But it is a sign in Gregory, and these things don't happen at random in Gregory.

"The king wept over the body, and then after a few days, took Fredegunde back again as his wife. When he did this, his brothers attributed Galswinthe's killing to his orders and toppled him from power."

The editor points out that probably they didn't, actually. This is a little bit too pat, and it may be a case of Gregory arranging the world so that the evil get punished in ways that they ought to, rather than in the ways that they do or don't.

But nevertheless, the portrait is of a polygamous king, a king who accumulates treasure, a king who is unscrupulous enough to kill his wife, does not seem to hide it very much. However, vengeance is taken on him both by supernatural powers and by natural forces.

So in talking about the bases of kingship, we have blood, and then war leadership. I have tried not to overemphasize the violence of this society, but it is a society in which war leadership is one of two major criteria of political leadership, the other being spiritual leadership, that we're going to talk about towards the end of the lecture.

The loyalty of the king's entourage was based on his ability to reward them with plunder. Remember that King Chlothar goes out to fight the Saxons, but the Saxons actually give him a good deal, and offer to give up a lot of their territory. And he says to his men, "I think this is a reasonable thing. The Saxons are pretty well armed. They're going to negotiate with us." It's on pages 50-51.

But the men won't accept that. They haven't come on this military expedition for political reasons. They want plunder. And so they force him, they threaten to kill him if he doesn't lead them into battle.

So in certain respects, we're back to the situation of Clovis. On the one, hand he seems very powerful. On the other hand, he seems intimidated by his followers. And this is an accurate picture of the position of rulership at this time. The king has to reward his followers. Because they're not following him for reasons of abstract political loyalty. They're not Merovingian patriots. They don't have a national anthem. They don't have a flag. They have a pledge of allegiance, but it's a private pledge of allegiance, of warrior to warrior.

He has two ways of rewarding them-- plunder or land. He can't pay them a salary, because the economy does not produce revenue in quite this way. It does, but it doesn't produce enough to reward soldiers in the way they want to be. Therefore, a successful leader is one who leads his troops into victory in battle. If he doesn't expand his possessions, if he doesn't lead them successfully, he's going to have to start giving away lands that belong to the king, or to the state, if we can call it that. And once he starts doing that, he's going to start having an erosion of his own revenue to the weakening of his dynasty and his power.

For the time being, in the world of Gregory of Tours, the kings are wealthy. There is a description of an extraordinary dowry sent with a princess named Rigunth, beyond the page assignments that you read. And there was so much stuff that "it took fifty wagons to carry the gold and silver and other ornaments." "The Franks offered many gifts, some giving gold, some silver, many giving horses, and most garments." "The mother of the princess brought so much gold and silver and garments that when the king saw it, he thought he was left with nothing." Ha ha ha.

In fact, the quantities of gold, silver, silks and other fine fabrics are quite impressive. Kings are very wealthy. And they're wealthy because of plunder, but also because of taxes. If you read Gregory carefully, you will see that the kings are collecting taxes. In order to collect taxes, you've got to have some sort of records. You've got to know where people are. You've got to have a kind of a register of property.

I'm distinguishing taxes from plunder. You can plunder your own people. That is, you can just ride around and take cattle that happen to be passing by, or burn people's farms, or shake them down, you know, threaten to cut off their ears if they don't cough up a certain amount of money in treasure. The problem with that is, of course, you start killing your own economy, and even Barbarian kings recognize that. But they do then have a kind of administration.

And here again, we have an interesting interaction of what might be called the practical and the superstitious. The death of Chilperic's son by dysentery, described on page 105. There's a serious epidemic. The epidemic is, of course, announced by portents. Whoever heard of an epidemic disease that wasn't preceded by comets, or eclipses, or, you know, heavenly phenomena? "While the kings were quarreling again, dysentery affected nearly all of Gaul. High fever with vomiting, extreme pain in the kidneys, headaches, and neck pain, saffron-colored or even green vomit. Some people thought it was a secret poison." Blah blah blah. It affected children. "We lost children so sweet and dear to us, whom we sat on our laps, or carried in our arms, and nursed with such care."

Chilperic's younger son became sick. When they saw that the end was near, they baptized him. He was doing a little better when his older brother named Clodebert was stricken by the same disease. Now, these are the children of Fredegunde, the lower-status but extremely powerful concubine, wife, whatever you want to call her.

"And Fredegunde, seeing that they were in danger of death, became repentant." And she says,

"For a long time, the divine goodness has endured our evildoing. Often it has rebuked us with fevers and other afflictions, and repentance did not follow. Look, now we are losing our sons. The tears of the poor, the laments of widows, and the sighs of orphans are killing them. We are left without a reason for gathering up anything. We pile up riches and do not know for whom we gather it. Our treasury will be left without an owner, full of plunder and curses. Were our storehouses not already overflowing with wine, were our barns not already full of grain, were our treasuries not laden with gold, silver, precious stones, necklaces, and the rest of the trappings of emperors? Look, we are losing what we held to be even more beautiful. Now please, come, let us burn all the unjust registers."

In other words, let's burn the tax registers. Let's burn the records we have of who owes what. "And let what was sufficient for your father, King Chlothar, be sufficient for us."

"And then she ordered brought forward the registers that Marcus"-- we don't know who he is-- "had delivered from her cities. She had them thrown in the fire and then turned to the king," who's not eager to have his registers burned, but finally he does. And they stop future assessments. And the kids die anyway. "After this, King Chilperic was generous to cathedrals, basilicas, and the poor." He's sort of learned his lesson.

But it's very interesting, this idea that what is killing their children is the vengeance of God, and that the poor, the widows, the orphans, the people that they have oppressed, have a kind of power of vengeance by mobilizing this supernatural force.

On the one hand, this is a regular old story. People, when they are faced with difficult situations, often pray, often promise, make some sort of deal. Get me out of this, oh Lord, and I will A) never do it again, B) do something else, C) I'll be really grateful. And sometimes it appears to work, and sometimes it doesn't. But it is a perfectly understandable emotion. But the belief that supernatural forces affect politics, the belief in the political leaders themselves, the knowledge that they are evil, and that God has, at least for a while, committed this evil is very, very powerful, and very, very uppermost in the mind of even an uneducated and, as Gregory himself demonstrates, normally thoroughly unscrupulous character like Fredegunde.

So what makes a good ruler, according to Gregory? Not peacefulness, since he believes the job of the ruler is to inflict fear, at the minimum, and damage, more likely. At one point, he describes Theudebert, one of the sons of Clovis, one of the members of the second generation, the closest thing he has to a good ruler. He says of Theudebert, "He ruled his kingdom justly, respected his bishops, was liberal to churches, relieved the wants of the poor, and distributed many benefits with piety and goodwill." So he is a just ruler and an effective one. But after that, all of his good qualities amount to treating the Church well and treating the poor well, and the Church is supposed to represent.

Chapter 5: The Church in Frankish Society [00:34:20]

So in the remainder of the time, we should consider, what is the Church? What do we mean by the Church? Any questions so far?

The Church in this society is represented by bishops and monasteries. We will be talking about monasteries next week. The difference is that bishops rule from cities even if they are just a little shell remnants of Roman cities. Nevertheless, they rule from a population center. They are involved with ordinary people, or at least their administrative apparatus deals with regular life. Monasteries are more a retreat from regular life, where monks, as you'll read in the Rule of Saint Benedict, live in a kind of isolated community, renouncing the world.

Now, in actual practice, there would be more similarities than differences, particularly as these monasteries were involved with the world quite a lot. But it is the bishops that represent, to the extent that any aspect of society does, a continuation of the Roman order, a continuation of the notion that there is a kind of educated ruler of local society. So the bishops are members of prominent families. They're often members of Roman prominent family.

Remember that Gregory was Bishop of Tours? The great relic of Tours was the cape of Saint Martin. His family had been bishops of Tours because they were locally prominent under the Roman Empire and continued this prominence under the Merovingians. Not necessarily peacefully or easily. As I said, Chilperic tried to have him deposed, and you've seen the episode in which they don't get along very well. But nevertheless, his family, of what he calls senatorial rank, even though there's no Senate anymore, were locally quite prominent.

This relic that they guard is not the only reason for their power. But bishops, as well as monks, are associated with some kind of saint protector. And the saint protects churches that have relics of the saint. A relic could be a bone, like an arm or a jaw, or it could be a piece of clothing associated with the saint.

In the case of Saint Martin--Saint Martin it was a military figure, whose most famous act of piety was he was stopped by a beggar while on horseback, and he split his cloak with a sword, and gave part of it too clothe this beggar. And this relic itself, the cloak, or a cappa, was held by the church of Saint Martin of Tours. And indeed, it is thought that the word "chapel" comes from the word for "cape." It's sort of a sacred space within a church where, in this era, relics would have been kept. We'll talk a lot about relics and why they are powerful, but for now, I do want to talk about the mobilization of sacred power. Because we don't have to ask the question, well, did it really work? Did this really happen? Did Saint Martin really revenge himself on people who plundered lands belonging to him? The important thing is to realize that the conception of the saint is not merely that of a pious respect, but of fear of a living presence. Somebody who, although dead, is not dead in the normal understanding of the word "dead." The bishops and monks mobilize a kind of locus of sacred power.

Now again, at 2 AM, after you were done thinking that Gregory was a fool, it may have occurred to you that this sounds a lot like polygamy [correction: polytheism]. This seems to multiply deities. It seems to multiply the sites, the places where the sacred has an effect. And shame on you for such a thought. How can this be polygamous [correction: polytheistic], just because there seem to be a bunch of different people wielding sacred power? We don't have to deal with this. Certainly, there seem to be a lot of people, most of them not alive, wielding sacred power. And it's a rather threatening kind of power, at that.

The bishop is a religious leader. Some of them are religious leaders in the sense of powerfully religious forces, but most of them are more squires than preachers. That is, they are landowners, patrons, more or less generous to the poor or to the people of the area that they rule. It's not a religion of deep introspection. We don't have a lot of mystical thinkers in the sixth century. We don't have a whole lot of ethical concern, except for the notion of the poor as a collection of people with certain rights to the ear of God. ¡°The poor¡± does not mean exactly what it means now-- the marginal, the people below some kind of income level. It means basically ordinary people without any particular unusual power in society.

In certain respects, the Church is an aspect of the power of the king. In certain respects, it defies the king. Gregory himself, and his work is full of other examples of bishops who stand up to the ruler and remonstrate with the ruler. That is, scold the ruler. But they can't really do this by themselves. They have to mobilize at least the potentiality of a kind of power that goes beyond merely the prestige of their family or the prestige of their office.

So, for example-- and again, this is something that's not in the Murray addition-- an example of the power of Saint Martin. This is at a monastery, the Monastery of Latte, where some other relics of Saint Martin are kept. "A force of hostile troops approached and prepared to cross the river which runs by, so that they might loot the monastery of Latte." L-A-T-T-E. Latte, but I think it's pronounced "lot."

"'This is the monastery of Saint Martin,' cried the monks. 'You Franks must not cross over here.' Most of those who heard this were filled with the fear of God and so withdrew." Oh, uh, I just thought it was a regular old monastery. Sorry. "Twenty of their number, however, who did not fear God, had no respect for the blessed saint, and they climbed into the boat and crossed the river. And driven on by the devil himself, they slaughtered the monks, damaged the monastery, and stole its possessions."

They made the, you know, gold and silver chalices, all of these properties that they had taken, "into bundles, and piled on their boat. Then they pushed off into the stream. But the keel began to sway to and fro, and they were carried round and round. They lost their oars, which might have saved them. They tried to reach the bank by pushing the butts of their spears into the bed of the river, but the boat split apart. They were all pierced through by the points of their own lances. They were killed by their own javelins. Only one of them remained unhurt, a man who had rebuked the others for what they were doing. If anyone thinks this happened by chance, let them consider the fact that one innocent man was saved among so many who were doing evil. After their death, the surviving monks retrieved the corpses from the bed of the river. They buried the dead bodies and replaced their own possessions in their monastery."

OK? So this is what happens to people who plunder monasteries. On the one hand, the story is useful for the fact that they plunder monasteries anyway. And without asking the question, did their boat really sink? We can see a notion of the violence of society being directed to illegitimate ends, and then being punished by the Church.

In terms of the question that we have been asking, what held society together, a lot of the answer has to be the church and its perceived mobilization of spiritual power. It's not the only answer, but it is an important aspect of the cohesiveness of a violent, but not completely unstable society.

Let me give you one more example. "Palladius inherited the office of count in the region of Javols." J-A-V-O-L-S. A quarrel ensued between him and Bishop Parthenius, in which this count insults the bishop, abuses him, accuses them of all sorts of crimes, and seized the property of the Church, which is, of course, what he really wanted to do.

They both go to the King's court. Palladius accused the bishop of being weak and effeminate. "'Where are your darling boys,' cried he, 'with whom you live in shame and debauchery?' The vengeance of God soon brought an end to these attacks." The following year, Palladius lost his countship and became terrified that King Sigibert wanted him killed, and eventually he commits suicide.

"I find it hard to believe that this horrible deed could have been achieved without the help of the devil. For the first would was enough to kill him, unless the devil came to his assistance to give him strength to carry out his terrible plan through to the end. He stabbed himself twice. His mother rushed in, beside herself with grief, fainted in front of her son. The whole family bewailed his fate. He was buried at the monastery of Cournon, but not in Christian ground, and no mass was sung over him."

Moral of the story? And Gregory is great at telling you the moral of the story. "It is clear that this fate befell him only because he had wronged his bishop." OK? Message of the book-- don't mess around with these bishops. This is a world in which spiritual power is effectively mobilized to social cohesion.

Chapter 6: The End of Merovingians [00:46:26]

Gregory dies in 594. I just want cast an eye forward, because we're going to pick the story up with the successors to the Merovingian dynasty, the Carolingians. Carolingians, retrospectively named for their most famous member, Charlemagne-- "Carolus" in Latin. The Merovingian-Carolingian transition is in the middle of the eighth century.

So this dynasty had another 150 years or so after Gregory, and they continued to be involved in civil war. Eventually there was a terrible feud between our friend Fredegunde, wife of Chilperic, and Brunhild, married to Sigibert. Brunhild was sister of the murdered Galswinthe, whom Fredegunde had basically gotten murdered. So Brunhild tries to avenge her murdered sister. Sigebert makes war on Chilperic. Fredegunde hires assassins to kill Sigebert.

And you've seen that Brunhild married the wayward son of Chilperic named Merovech. Merovech eventually commits suicide. Brunhild, eventually after these guys pass from the scene, rules, and so does Fredegunde. Chilperic is assassinated. Fredegunde rules in the name of her son. And so, in fact, in the late sixth century, the rulers are these two powerful and feuding women. In 613, Chlothar the second, son of Fredegunde and Chilperic, capture the aged Queen Brunhild and had her torn apart by wild horses.

What is happening here, behind the unedifying drama of violence and feud within a dysfunctional family-- dysfunctional, a word unknown in Merovingian Frankish, I'm pretty convinced-- is that certain regions of the Frankish realm are identified. If you look on the last of the maps in the appendix to the Murray addition, you'll see reference made to the two regions that don't really correspond to today. One is Austrasia, which is a kind of land that encompasses the Rhine regions, Belgium, a bit of Holland, Northeastern France, and Neustria, which is more the heart of France. Paris, the Seine. These will become sort of two sub-realms of the Merovingian Frankish kingdom. And our people that we're going to be following towards the end of the course, the Carolingians, will be associated with Austrasia.

We turn to England for Wednesday. If you still have your papers and want to give them to us, please do so. I'll see you on Wednesday.

Lecture 12 - Britain and Ireland [October 13, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction to the British Isles [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Today, we're going to talk about Ireland and England, predominantly England, not because Ireland isn't important, but because we know less about Ireland. The reason we know relatively more about England in its post-Roman period, that is to say after 420, is because of the historian Bede writing in the early eighth century, a monk at Jarrow, which was part of a twin monastery in Northumbria, which you see on your map on the northeastern part of England before you get to what's now Scotland.

Bede wrote, among other things, A History of the English Church and People, which is full of miracles and very, very pro-Christian, as much as Gregory of Tours. But it is a much more easy -to-follow narrative, and a narrative with a certain kind of point. It's about the conversion of England and the establishment of the Church.

The other advantage for England over Ireland in terms of evidence is archaeology. A lot more has been done with excavating sites in England. Now by England, we mean literally England, the part that is not Wales, not Scotland, not Ireland, the part of the British Isles. The ensemble, essentially the two islands, are referred to as the British Isles. Britain is England, Scotland and Wales. Ireland is Ireland.

The Britons, however, B-R-I-T-O-N-S, are the collective term for the Celtic population. Celtic is both a linguistic group and a somewhat vague ethnic term. It means the people who were there in the British Isles before the Romans came, and who were there afterwards fighting invaders from Europe. These invaders, who come in the 440's, are known as the Anglo-Saxons. Bede tells us it's the Angles, the Saxons, and the Jutes. The Angles give their name to England, Angle-land. The Jutes we know nothing about. So a certain kind of medievalist will go on about founding a journal of Jute studies and inviting contributors to something that we really have absolutely no idea of. It would be in that league of smallest, thinnest volumes, at least in terms of three dimensional books.

The Saxons come from-- there's still a very large part of Germany called "Saxony." What the nature of these peoples are, how they were differentiated among themselves, is a source of a lot of real, or at least looks real, scholarship, as opposed to studying the Jutes, but we don't have to go into that.

If you need to get the cast of characters: Celts, Anglo-Saxons. And the Anglo-Saxons conquer much of the island, more or less what would become England, but not all. They do not conquer Scotland. They do not conquer Wales. And they don't really conquer Cornwall. So the western part of Britain remains Celtic. And to this day, Wales and Scotland consider themselves different from England. You can get into a lot of trouble by calling that area "England" with the people there. And particularly in Scotland, there's a possibility that they may separate from the United Kingdom at some point.

Ireland. Ireland was never occupied by the Romans. Ireland was Celtic, was in contact with the Roman Empire, but was not part of it. This makes some difference-- and we'll talk about it when we come to talk about conversion-- but it doesn't make as much difference as it sounds. Because the thing about England, or Britain, is that the Roman impress there would be almost wiped out once the Romans withdrew.

And so, in contrast to what we saw with Gregory of Tours and Merovingian Gaul, Merovingian Frankish kingdom, the Roman influence in Britain is almost wiped out. Recall what we saw as persistence of Roman practices in the Merovingian kingdom: bishops, cities, the Latin language, tax records, written legal codes. That is not to say that the Merovingians weren't, as I said before, to be described by technical terms like "thugs." Or that this was a sleek, well-functioning kingdom. You landed at the airport and got the train immediately, and everything was sleek and nice like Amsterdam or someplace like that, as opposed to Kennedy. But that the Roman inheritance was visible and influential.

In Britain, when the Roman troops withdrew to fight the invaders in Gaul, this ended Roman society in Britain. And the reason for this is partly that Britain was a frontier viewed from the point of view of the Mediterranean, the center of gravity of the Roman Empire. The frontier symbolized most dramatically by walls, the most famous of which is Hadrian's Wall, a wall that separated out the barbarians.

But since you didn't have a river like the Danube or the Rhine, there seemed to be no natural frontier. Remnants of Hadrian's Wall are the largest souvenir of the Roman era, a wall to keep out the barbarians from the north because in fact, the Romans didn't conquer the entire island. They conquered the parts they thought were worthwhile. And they did think it was worthwhile, frontier or not. We know that the Romans built villas -- They might be a little cold, these somewhat open air Mediterranean-planned things, but mosaic courtyards -- drank a lot of wine, much of it imported; built cities, walls, other fortifications; cultivated land.

So it's not as if there wasn't a serious Roman province of Britain from its conquest in the late first century until its abandonment in the early fifth century. But here, the invaders tended to obliterate much of what had been there in Roman times. And the Celtic population, who had been Romanized, at least at the elite levels, the Celtic population didn't really save very much from the Roman Empire.

The Celts might remain Christian, whereas the invaders were pagan. But the Celts tended not to have cities, or at least large centers. And they tended not to have or retain Roman forms of government. The one kind of, if not literally interesting, at least weird aspect of Celtic-Roman resistance is the figure of King Arthur. I'm going to bring him up now, and then I'm going to drop him.

King Arthur belongs properly to the continuation of this course, because his legendary status starts really in the world of romance, of French romance and then of international romance, chivalric literature. By romance, we mean not only love stories, but novels of chivalry, of knights, of battles. He is a figure who is 99.9% legend, whatever the remainder of that, 0.1% real. Insofar as he is real, he may be identified with Celtic resistance to the Anglo-Saxons invaders, Celtic-Roman resistance in the late fifth, early sixth centuries.

But the proportion of art to history in this is, if not 99.9%, at least very, very substantial. So the original setting of the Arthurian stories is that of the resistance to the Anglo-Saxon invaders. The Arthurian romances do have a kind of Celtic beginning. Well, not a ¡°kind of¡± ¨C they do have a Celtic beginning and then they are appropriated by people in the romance language tradition. French, first of all.

So as Wickham says on page 151, "Nowhere else in the Roman Empire was the collapse of culture, economy and urbanization so complete." He uses that wonderful phrase again, "radical economic simplification," i.e., there's no more plumbing. There's no more what we would consider to be affluent, civilized society. The ceramics don't come from Africa anymore. The wine doesn't come from France anymore. People are reduced to a kind of subsistence. Or at least most people, because as we'll see, some of these kings actually are able to get some luxury goods from abroad.

If it were just a story of barbarization, it would be less interesting than in fact the peculiar nature of England in this period, which goes from being a contested territory between the Germanic invaders and the Celtic population to a kingdom slowly converted, in the course of the seventh century, to Christianity from paganism, to the leading center of culture in Europe. Bede, who lived from 673 to 735, was the most cultivated scholar in Europe of the early eighth century. And the most cultivated scholar in Europe of the late eighth century was also from England, Alcuin, counselor and adviser to Charlemagne.

How do you go from being a-- well, I don't like to use the word "primitive," but certainly barbarian enough area, to having the largest libraries, the most cultivated scholars? Now it is true, as I think I've said before, that any time you can say that such and such a person was the smartest person in Europe has got to be a fairly bad time. Right? In the 19th century, you have your choice from all sorts of scientific, literary, other kinds of intellectual experts. Who would even dare to say? But we know that Boethius and Cassiodorus are the smartest guys in Europe in the sixth century because they have access to stuff that almost no one else does. Because they're writing about classical authors that almost no one else has in their libraries.

We know that Isidore of Seville is probably the smartest guy of the early seventh century in Visigothic Spain, because we have his works. We have an idea of what he's read. We know his sources. And again, he's got the biggest library. "Biggest library" may mean 100 books, but 100 books in 700 AD is a serious collection of knowledge. Now, this is not easy knowledge. This is not as if everything were-- well, I don't want to say Wikipedia either¡ªif everything were like Wikipedia five years ago, elementary and often wrong.

These are very different kinds of works from what might interest us. Certainly a lot of biblical stuff, but also, for example, a lot of computing of time. Bede would be remembered for The History of the English Church and People, but also for a lot of his works on figuring out time. He is credited, although not uniquely credited, but is an important person in the development of the BC-AD scheme. Believe it or not, people are not born into the world calculating according to BC-AD. Lots of people calculate according to other systems. How did they come up with this? And moreover, how do they then fit the calendar into it?

How do you keep time when you don't have electric or battery operated clocks? How do you know what the seasonal changes are? But in fact, the most troublesome problem, which had been particularly controversial to the conversion of England in the generation before Bede in the early seventh and mid-seventh century, was the calculation of Easter. Easter is a real problem. Now naturally, it's not a problem if someone else tells you. If in 1970, you open up a little pocket book calendar, and it says, "OK, Easter is this day," you trust them. Or now, if you have some feature on your iPhone that gives you Easter for the next 3,000 years in case you want to know when Easter is in 3500 AD, no problem.

But if you're out there in Northumbria, or anywhere for that matter, in a monastery somewhere where it's really crucial to celebrate it on the right day. Remember what I said about dogma and religious observation? God doesn't want you to say something like, "Dude, I don't really know when Easter is, but I think I'm going to celebrate it now." You can't do that. You can't just decide, "I know it's sort of in the spring. Nobody around here for miles and miles and miles knows how to calculate it. So what the heck, we'll do it on a Tuesday because I'm busy on what I think is Easter Sunday." That's not the way monasticism works, and we'll talk about that next week.

The schedule is really, really important, but it's also difficult to figure out. And people disagree about it. To this day, the Eastern Orthodox churches celebrate a different date for Easter than the Western because they operate according to a different calendar. All right, well, so I'm not saying that this is the kind of knowledge that you ought to drop everything else to pursue, but it is a kind of knowledge that requires a sort of observation that in fact, we do not have.

Most of us, unless we're astronomy majors, have no idea what the sky looks like at night. A) because we can't see it because of artificial light, and B) because we're not very curious. We cannot track animals, most of us, and those of you can, I'm interested in your knowledge. Most of us haven't the faintest idea how things grow except because we've been to the Yale farm, and "Oh my gosh, look at this stuff." That's part of the reason for it because we are not very close to nature. I think that environmental concerns notwithstanding, most of us have a huge investment in not being too close to nature. But the observation of phenomena is something that is much superior in so-called indigenous, primitive, traditional or historical society.

So the story of England and Ireland centers on conversion. And the reason this is so is because conversion represents a change in orientation, a change in orientation towards a larger world. Instead of a tribal and fragmented identity-- I'm not making a statement about the truth or non-truth of Christianity but about the sense of belonging to a larger world whose purposes encompass not only your group, but a larger group of people out there.

And I think we can get a feeling for this from a famous passage of Bede's Ecclesiastical History, written in 731. And he is describing events of about a century earlier, when King Edwin of Northumbria summoned a council to decide whether or not to accept the Christian God. And the chief of the pagan priests speaks in favor of embracing Christianity. Even though you would think that he would be the defender of the old faith, he in fact speaks to this assembly, according to Bede, in favor of Christianity on the grounds that it tells us what went before us and what will come after us.

And the passage goes like this, "And one of the King's chief men presently said, 'Thus seems it to me, oh King. The present life of man on earth, against that time which is unknown to us, is as if you were sitting at a feast with your chief men and your thanes'"-- your nobles-- "'in winter time.'"-- T-H-A-N-E-S.-- "'The fire burns, and the hall is warm. And outside, it rains and snows and storms. There comes a sparrow and swiftly flies through the house.'" The insulation is not great in these halls, right?

"It comes through one door, and it goes out another. Lo, in the time in which he is within, he is not touched by the winter storm. But that time is the flash of an eye and the least of times. And he soon passes from winter out to winter again. So is the life of man revealed for a brief space, but what went before, and what follows after, we do not know. Therefore, if this teaching can reveal any more certain knowledge, it seems only right we should follow it."

Now this is not why people necessarily converted because not everybody's really bothered by that. Most people figure, "Wow, I'm in the hall. It's warm. It's great. I'm having such a good time. And when I have to leave, brief though it will be, I'll deal with that." But it does explain some of the appeal of Christianity and why the invaders who were quote "pagan" converted. And indeed why people tend to convert to world religions like Christianity and Islam to this day.

A local religion, which I'm calling "tribal" only because by that I mean confined to a people whose identity is caught up in their religion. A tribal people or a tribal religion has trouble surviving extensive contact with other people, because its uniqueness is threatened by the realization that there's a huge world out there of lots of other people. And when you start interacting with them, that is when you're no longer isolated, you will tend to seek an explanation for things that is grander than just: These gods protect my spear. This god protects my hearth. This god protects against accidents in childbirth.

There are exceptions. Judaism is one of the most obvious. Here is a religion of a small group of people that survives over the centuries. But it is not exactly a tribal religion in the sense that it's monotheistic and historical sense is very strong. And this is what the priest means, or at least this is what I mean in interpreting the priest's words as reported by Bede, by "historical sense." A sense that God rules of the world even if I'm not in it. That there is something to come, not necessarily that there is an afterlife, although that obviously is part of the teachings of Christianity, but that there is a purpose to life.

Chapter 2: The Conversion of England [00:23:11]

So conversion, the conversions of Ireland and England are different. The process of converting England begins in 597 with a missionary known-- unfortunately whose name is Augustine. This is Augustine of Canterbury, not Augustine of Hippo, The Confessions Augustine.

He is sent by the Roman pope, Gregory I, Gregory the Great. Bede tells us that he was motivated to do this-- this is a very strange thing to do. There had not been missionaries sent by the pope before-- that he was motivated to do this by seeing British boys for sale in the slave market in Rome. And asking who they were, he was told that they were Angles, Angles as in Anglo-Saxon, A-N-G-L-E-S. And he is reputed to have said, "We should make them angels, not Angles." Angeli, non angli, or angels not Angles.

Whatever the story, Augustine arrived around 597 at an island that had some remnants of Celtic Christianity, but is basically pagan and barbarian. He landed in Kent in the southeast corner of the island closest to the continent. And on this map, what I'd like you to know particularly are Kent, with Canterbury as its capital in the southeast; Wessex in the west, which I think I've helpfully underlined; Mercia, towards the center; Northumbria, umbrella, northeast. The most important kingdoms in England-- and Wickham has emphasized how fragmented this territory was-- the most important kingdoms would be, at different times, Northumbria, Mercia, and Wessex.

But the first place to convert is Kent. It faces the continent. The pagan ruler of Kent had actually married a Christian princess from Merovingian Gaul. And Augustine established the first bishopric in Kent at Canterbury, which would be henceforth the major ecclesiastical center of Britain, its archbishopric. Bede tells us about this, but he also tells us a lot more about Northumbria, which is where he lived.

And here you can see the off-again, on-again pace of conversion. The pious King Edwin, who had that council that we just described, converted his people after a vision. But after his death in 633, his successor went back to the old, traditional religion, renouncing Christianity. And then, the successor to that king, a man named Oswald, reestablished Christianity. But he was killed in battle by the pagan King of Mercia in 642. Only in 660's, 670's is England pretty definitively converted to Christianity.

We can see this kind of transition in two of the most famous sources of information about this world, the poem Beowulf-- how many people have read this? Yeah, everybody's read this at one time another. Beowulf does have some little Christian themes, and there is some debate as to what extent the poem is to be understood in Christian terms. But in its atmosphere, its rituals-- the burial in the ship, the burning of the body, the devotion not only to war, but to feasting and to gold, ring giving-- it evokes-- not merely evokes-- it is a description of a warrior society in which although it is written in Old English, remember that it actually takes place in Denmark. This is a North Sea world in which the communications patterns are such that you could write an English poem about someone who goes over to the mainland for adventure.

The other source is one of the great archaeological triumphs of the last hundred years, the so-called Sutton Hoo treasure, which is in the British Museum. In East Anglia, close to the water actually, close to the sea, a burial ship was found in 1939. Probably the king buried here was Raedwald, king of East Anglia who died in 627.

Now it's a pagan burial because of all the grave goods. All the stuff is in there, or so it would seem. But it's hard to tell-- just as in Beowulf, is it pagan, is it Christian?-- it's hard to tell about this burial scene because he's got a lot of stuff from what might be called foreign gifts or maybe plunder. Foreign gifts: he's got two Byzantine silver spoons. So two silver spoons made in Constantinople or thereabouts. He's got gold coins. They are mostly from the Merovingian kingdom, and they're different. They're all different.

This is not an economic thing. This is a treasure thing. The difference between economy and treasure is that treasure is just for hoarding and economy is fluid and transactional. The hoarding, of course, we see in Beowulf, most obviously with the dragon. The dragon is not accumulating the treasure in order to safeguard his retirement or trade up in caves. He just sleeps on this treasure. And the point of that is, of course, that people accumulate treasure for non-economic reasons, for reasons that have to do with their own satisfaction or their own anxieties. And the utility of treasure is generally overestimated. Nevertheless of course, at the same time this is a world in which gold, treasure accumulation is what men do.

So what else is at Sutton Hoo? A wonderful helmet, unique because these things tend to disintegrate. A sword, a mail shirt, and then all sorts of little paraphernalia, some of it with Christian symbols like crosses, some of it very much in the pagan kind of world. Beowulf and Sutton Hoo go together. They both show us a world of treasure, of weapons, of drinking halls, of palaces, sort of isolated.

The drinking hall is important, as you know from Beowulf. It is the manifestation of civilization. It is that protection from outside that Bede describes in the little sparrow anecdote. But it is also the center of government. We're back to the ruler and his entourage or comitatus, his gang, if you want to put a more cynical coloration on it.

Chapter 3: The Conversion of Ireland and the Irish Church [00:31:56]

So the conversion of England is completed by the late seventh century, but it is a more complicated story than just monolithic Christianity versus monolithic paganism because there are two kinds of Christianity that seek to convert England. One from Ireland and one from Rome.

Ireland, let's just pause over Ireland. Never part of the Roman Empire, as I said. But, it's also the first place outside the Roman world to been converted to Christianity, the first place in Europe actually. The first place period is Ethiopia. Ethiopia, of course in northeastern Africa, would be converted to Christianity very early, fourth century AD probably.

But within Europe, Ireland was converted to Christianity by the British or English missionary Saint Patrick. This is a little embarrassing, but in fact, the apostle to Ireland is one of those British, Celtic, Roman, fourth-century figures, Patrick. So in 600 AD, Ireland was largely Catholic, while England was mostly pagan. Irish Christianity had certain peculiarities, some of them related to its lack of a Roman past. Thus, for example, it did not have bishops really, or the bishops were weak because there had not been cities in Ireland on the Roman model. And therefore, Christianity didn't have an urban background, but rather a very decentralized and rural background.

The most powerful institutions in Ireland were monasteries because these were great rural centers. And so the monks ruled over the bishops generally. Irish monasticism was very austere. The Irish monks were more ascetic than the monks we'll be meeting next week from the Benedictine tradition started in Italy. And they also were less fixed in one place. In Benedictine monasticism, you're not supposed to move. You're supposed to be stable. You're supposed to go through the same routine every day. The Irish favored a more wandering existence and the establishment of little communities or colonies far away.

The Irish form of piety emphasizes exile, and it might be exile to a scary, an almost unimaginable kind of environment. There are, for example, lots of little islands in the Irish Sea that seem to be uninhabitable. That is if you look at them from the tour boat, you see a lot of birds, and it's a birders paradise. But in the middle of July, it's overcast, raining, and the sea is pounding. And then you notice there a little remnants of houses. Yes? Question?

Student: No.

Professor Paul Freedman: Little caves where people in the sixth and seventh century lived. Or the island is tiny, smaller than this building, and it looks like twenty people were living there. What are they living on? Well, poultry I guess, but this is a very severe form of asceticism. And the wandering also can mean just holing up on some island or wandering around the European continent and converting people. The Irish were great missionaries, both to England and to the continent. And we'll be talking about that some more.

What about the Irish as the saviors of civilization, a book published about eight, nine years ago? How the Irish Saved Civilization is like all such-- well, most such popular books-- kind of overdone and reductionist. It's not literally exactly true, but here again, as with England, we have a society that had no Roman influence, and yet had a highly developed tradition of learning, preservation of Latin.

In part, very good knowledge of Latin because they didn't think they spoke it. Remember we said of people in the former Roman empire? It's hard to date the point at which someone in Spain is no longer speaking Latin but is speaking something that we can start to call Spanish. And in Ireland, the distinction was quite clear. You had to learn Latin in lessons. You had to go to class. You had to be taught Latin. And so the Latin that was taught was bookish, but for that in many respects, correct.

Finally, the Irish celebrated Easter according to a different calendar. And so when we refer to the Irish or the Celtic Church, we mean this more decentralized Church, this somewhat more wandering missionary Church, a Church that was less hierarchical and less organized around bishops than that of its rival Rome. The story of the seventh century in England is therefore partly the story of competition between paganism and Christianity and flip flopping between them. And competition between Irish Christianity, represented by, for example, the monastery of Iona in what's now Scotland, I-O-N-A, the missions of St. Aidan, A-I-D-A-N, whom Bede describes with great sympathy even though he doesn't agree with him.

But the controversy really centered, ultimately, or at least in an immediate sense, over Easter. At the Synod of Whitby in 664, it was decided to embrace the Roman calculation of Easter. And with that, bishops, hierarchy, a more organized Church.

I have a lot of trouble with this Easter problem. You will have noticed that I have evaded telling you exactly what the calculations are. Some of you may know much better than me. But the Jewish Passover is established by lunar months. Christians wanted to break with Jewish tradition in celebrating Easter according to a somewhat different calendar. So it combined lunar and solar methods of calculation, a very complex operation therefore.

In the year 455, Rome, that is to say the Papacy under our friend Leo I-- mission to the Huns, definition of the two natures of Christ-- Leo I and Rome opted for a nineteen-year cycle of calculating Easter. But the Celtic churches, cut off from the continent-- remember, we're in this post-Roman world of very little contact-- kept an eighty-four-year cycle. So in the seventh century, when the Roman missionaries had arrived again, you have two conflicting dates for Easter every year. I mean occasionally, just as with the Orthodox and Catholic Easters, they come together. So every so often, they will actually be the same Sunday, but generally speaking, different.

And so you get these ludicrous scenes like I'm King Oswiu of Northumbria celebrating Easter according to the Celtic tradition, and his wife, who was from Kent, celebrated it according to the Roman tradition. So one Sunday was Celtic Easter, and then the next Sunday was Roman Easter. So it's not so much that Easter is so important intrinsically, but it is a symbol of the embrace of the Roman form of Christianity, and the bringing of England into an orientation more towards the continent than towards the Celtic West.

Chapter 4: Closing Remarks [00:41:01]

What is amazing, as I said before, is how quickly, once the conversion takes place, England becomes not only integrated into the continent, but a place of great cultural accomplishment. The great archbishop of Canterbury of this post-Whitby era, Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury, 669-690, established bishoprics, monasteries, an endowed them with books. Theodore was an interesting character. He's actually from Syria. And how somebody from Syria becomes archbishop of Canterbury, something that would be very unlikely now, in the seventh century AD is an aspect of some preservation of the outlines of the cosmopolitan Roman world that we began the course with. There are a lot of Syrian popes at this time too, Syrian and Greek popes from the Eastern Mediterranean.

The first manuscript we have of the Bible as a single manuscript-- in other words where all of the books of the Bible are contained in the same volume-- is from this place and this era, the so-called Codex Amiatinus. A magnificently decorated Bible, sent to the pope in 716, written at Bede's monastery of Jarrow, now in Florence at the Medici Laurentian Library of Florence. It is decorated in this very distinctive style that you all know, if not from courses, from Christmas cards and stuff. The Book of Kells is the most famous example of this.

This is the so-called Insular style because it's shared by both Celtic Ireland and Anglo-Saxon England. Lots of intricate curlicues, complicated animals, magnificent contrasts of color, a kind of abstraction when you first look at it. It looks like an oriental carpet. But in fact, if you look at it a little more closely, you can see that there all sorts of little intertwined animals or fantastic shapes and colors within it.

Questions? Problems? We could spend an entire semester on England, but I think we've had at least a taste of its significance, both in its own right and as one more and rather different aspect of the post-Roman world that we've been occupied with. I'll see you for the exam on Monday.

Lecture 13 - Monasticism [October 19, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction to Monasticism [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: We're going to talk about monasticism today. And monasticism in the popular imagination, and accurately, is linked to learning. We all have this image of monks quietly copying manuscripts, and those manuscripts being how the learning of the ancient world was transmitted. We're going to talk a little more about that when we come to near the end of the course on intellectuals in the court of Charlemagne.

But monasticism and learning are linked in our mind, but they are not intrinsically linked. There is no logical reason why monks should copy manuscripts. They should pray. They should live in some kind of renunciation of the world. Generally speaking in the medieval West, they live in communities. Generally speaking, they are engaged in a kind of corporate rather than individual prayer. All of these things follow from the way monasticism was conceived. And the major text, though not the only one, but the most influential text about how monasticism was conceived, is the sixth century Rule of Saint Benedict.

The Rule of Saint Benedict has some possible references to sacred reading, as it calls it, or to some kind of program of knowledge. It assumes that the monks are literate, for example, a lot to assume at that time. But nowhere does Benedict say, "Please preserve the classical tradition by being scribes and writing and the Scriptorium." So how does this come about, is one of the problems that we will deal with.

But what we're really interested [in] is monasticism without the learning. And the reason we're interested in that is not only is this the prevailing spiritual movement of the early Middle Ages, but it has a tremendous influence on society outside the monastic walls. Because central to our discussion is a paradox. The paradox is that while the monks are trying to escape the world, the world is following them.

The world is very interested in their prayers, because their prayers are thought to have a powerful real -world, this- world, effect. So as the monks become more distant from society, God hears their prayers with more and more sympathy. Therefore their prayers have a kind of power, a power to benefit others. This notion of power is like some kind of almost electrical utility. They're building up an incredible amount of electricity, if you want to call it that, or let's say spiritual energy to be more accurate. Way more than they need; way more than they can consume. They're like some little Persian Gulf state that is producing ten percent of the world's oil. There's no way they can use all of that.

In this case then, how does the surplus get distributed? It gets distributed through the generosity of people outside the [correction: monastic] world worried about the condition of their souls. The notion that I, possessor of spiritual reserves and spiritual power, can pray for you, sinful knight, sinful king, sinful merchant, is called intercession. The notion that I can intercede for you-- and we've already seen this, haven't we? We've seen this with the saints in Gregory of Tours and in other texts.

We've tried to emphasize how important the saints are, not just for our understanding of medieval religion, but for our understanding of medieval society. Remember that I tried to emphasize that one of the problems, once you're done with the Roman Empire, is how society is held together. In the Roman Empire, it's pretty clear. It's held together by institutions that, although not the same as our own, are translatable to our own: law, administrative structure, landholding, the whole panoply of what passes for civilized life.

But in the early Middle Ages, after the collapse of the Roman Empire, we've seen the society does not have as much literacy, does not have very good records. The kings are thugs. The political order is very unstable. There's an awful lot of warfare. There's a lot of disorder. You can't just dial 9-1-1 and expect a response.

So the question then becomes what holds that society together? And we mentioned some things, including the Church. And here we're looking at a particular instance of how that works. Because the monks, far from being kind of out there in the forest or desert or some remote region, or even if they are in the forest or desert and some remote region, are extremely important to how society functions. Because this is a society in which the spiritual, the military, the political, the economic, are not easily conceptually separated.

This is the Middle Ages, OK? You love the Middle Ages, otherwise we wouldn't be here together. But this is the part of the Middle Ages that is perhaps most medieval. What could be more medieval than monasticism? When I started teaching, which wasn't that long after the Middle Ages, but when I started teaching, monasticism was a real problem, because it was so alien. What are these people doing?

In a way the situation is better, because monasticism is sort of chic, at least temporary weekend monasticism. People think of monasteries sort of like spas. You go there to get cleansed. In fact a lot of monasteries have taken on a lot of new business with retreats, and detoxification, and pilgrimage, and these kinds of concepts. But at the same time, while I think we understand the desire to renounce the world or to take time off from the world or to leave the personal digital devices at home and think about something for more than three seconds at a time, all of this is temporary. The whole point of detoxification is that you then go and re-toxify yourself or go back to normal life. What we have to understand here are people who have decided to embrace a world-renouncing way of life for good.

Now monks, therefore, are clergy. They are professional members of the Church. But they're not priests. It's key that you understand the difference. Priests interact with the laity. Layman, laity, are people who are ordinary people, believers but not clergy.

The priests interact with the laity through mass, the performance of the sacraments, things like baptism, a little bit later than this period, confession, anointment of the sick. These are things in which the sacred is conveyed from the spiritual world to laypeople via priests. Priests are in that sense the intermediaries between the divine and the material.

But because priests are involved in the world, there are certain aspects of their differentiation from the world, and there's a lot of debate in the Church at various times over whether that includes celibacy, not getting married. In the era that we're dealing with, there are married priests, or there are priests who are more or less married. And then there are priests who are celibate. But monks are not supposed to interact with the world. They are leading a life of contemplation and self-denial.

True, they cannot focus only on their own salvation. Because that would mean ignoring the Christian's duty to others. One of the problems about being a contemplative in the Christian tradition is as soon as you say something like, "Boy, I am really contemplating great today." Or, "Wow, I am really seeing the mysteries of the universe." Or, "I can't believe I haven't had anything to eat or drink for three days and am feeling great." You are falling off. You're falling away. You're selfish. You're taking pride in your own accomplishments.

So from the beginning is the notion that the monks have to abandon everything, including self-satisfaction. In fact even most importantly self-satisfaction. And this is where Benedict's notion of humility comes from, which is very strong in The Rule of Saint Benedict.

Chapter 2: Renouncing the World [00:10:21]

Where does this desire to rid oneself of the world come from? It's very strong in Christianity. It's all over the New Testament. That is actually part of the Christian message. It's awkward, because most people don't follow that, including most people who are believers. They don't in fact give away everything they have to the poor and follow Christ. They don't renounce the pleasures of life, of the flesh, and so forth. But that is sort of what they are telling you to do.

The first monk, the first guy who we know of to decide to run away to the desert and lead a life of contemplation is Saint Anthony of Egypt.-- Well Anthony, you know how to spell that.-- He lived from 251 to 356. I have trouble believing this. The sources are pretty good. I have trouble believing that anybody could live to be 105 in the Roman Empire. Or indeed, at any time before ten years ago or so. But there it is.

At least we know that in 270, he heard the saying of Jesus in a Church: "Go sell all you have. Give to the poor and follow me." And he followed this literally. He established himself as a solitary hermit in Egypt. And Egypt is a great place for monasticism, because Egypt has a very narrow strip of incredibly fertile land on either side of the Nile. The Nile, which until the building of the Aswan Dam, flooded every year. And its silt, that it brought down from its sources, was so rich that it created this marvelous soil on which all sorts of things could grow. But once you got beyond that limit, you were in the desert.

So you have absolute and total really Sahara-like desert, very close to fertile land, the best land of the Mediterranean. So that you could have a kind of interaction between-- I mean, it's not like you decide that you want to be a hermit and you live in Manhattan. And you drive and you drive and you drive, and you get to Long Island, and you're in the suburbs, and then you're in the ex-urbs. And then you're in sort of gas stations and strip malls. And then you're in the Hamptons.

It's very, very hard-- I mean you can, actually, if you go north, pretty soon you'll get if not hermit country, at least a decent isolation. Of course the problem with New York is that it's really cold. It's great to be a hermit in September. But the Adirondack hermitages present problems in the winter. Egypt is hot, all right, but certainly no exposure to cold problem.

Anyway, the first monks are in Egypt. And they are known as the Desert Fathers. Often, they live alone as hermits, but sometimes they live in communities. They have their own cells in these communities, but they can come together for prayer or for some sort of spiritual companionship. What's interesting is that right from the start, these hermits or first monks, appealed to the people who had no plans to become monks. They appealed to the people of the cities of Alexandria or Thebes, etc. of Egypt.

The reason is, and the reason why people would become monks, is the establishment of the Church as the official church of the Roman Empire. There are no monks in the first years of Christianity, because just being a Christian means denying the world. The threat of death at the hands of the Roman authorities and the illegality of the religion means that you are already in a world-renouncing position.

But once the church becomes established, once all sorts of people start joining it for motives that have nothing to do with spiritual reasons, or maybe ten percent spiritual, ninety percent? it's time, my career, I want my kids to grow up in the sort of right faith. Then those of real spiritual bent, devotion, desire, have to present themselves as more than merely attending church as serious about Christianity in some sense.

So monasticism has to be understood in its earliest years as a reaction against the compromises and comfort of official Christianity. And we see this in Augustine's Confessions. Where, you will recall, the emotional crisis that finally tipped Augustine over the edge into his conversion experience was hearing about the monks of Egypt from someone who had come to Milan and had been in Egypt, and described these men and actually women who were not well-educated, were certainly not trained in rhetoric, law, and the classics to the extent of Augustine.

Yet nevertheless, they had in Augustine's words, "stormed the gates of heaven." They had by their spiritual renunciation hence their spiritual power, become close to God in ways that he, Augustine, and his friends with all their knowledge, had not. And this contrast is what decides Augustine to embrace a way of life that although not monastic and much more active in the world, is a renunciation of the standard career, the standard definitions of success in the Roman Empire, and involvement in the world in things like marriage, property owning, etc.

So in fact, if the monks are these not very well-educated people, if embracing their values means giving up Cicero and the classical tradition, it looks as if monasticism is an anti-intellectual movement. We've come back to this paradox of the monks as custodians of learning. It's not quite the fox as the protector of the hens, but it is not automatic that the monks would find themselves in the position of copying down Cicero.

Chapter 3: Monks and Hermits as Spiritual Patrons [00:17:59]

So the first forms of monasticism are those of the Egyptian desert. There's a kind of tension from the start between ascetic individualism and collective monasticism. Ascetic individualism means one person engaging in practices that dramatize the renunciation of the world. A classic example is not from Egypt but from Syria. These are the saints who sit on top of pillars for decades at a time. Individual, right? They're alone on this pillar, maybe it's this wide, or maybe this wide at the top, thirty feet high, fifty feet high.

These saints collectively are known as Stylites. A "stylite" is a pillar. And the most famous of them, Saint Simeon of the Desert, or Saint Simeon Stylites, lived on top of this pillar for what is it, thirty-five years? Something like that. Thirty-five years up there, in the rain, in the sun. Imagine the sanitary arrangements. Imagine this. I mean this is world renunciation.

But he was not alone. He was alone on top of the pillar. He was a hermit. But people came and visited him. There are pictures of ladders going up to him, people climbing these ladders, sometimes delivering a little message: "Would you pray for my child who is dying of"-- well I don't know what he's dying of. Asking for things in the world: "Please deliver me from a bankruptcy;" "Please deliver me from illness;" "Please protect me on this voyage."

Why don't they ask God themselves? Save a trip to the desert out of Antioch? Save perhaps a donation to the Saint Simeon Stylites Foundation? Because God is going to listen to Simeon, right? Why?

Student: Because he's worthy to speak to him.

Professor Paul Freedman: And why is he worthy? What has he done to make himself worthier? You're quite right. He's renounced the world.

Student: And he knows Latin.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yeah. He's not unbelievably cultivated, probably Syriac in this case. Probably those notes are in Syriac. But his world renunciation has imbued him with power. This is not unique to Christianity, right? Shamanism, the idea of a person who is an outcast in society, or who has renounced the normal comforts of society. What's the problem with just getting married, having kids, having a job? Wondering what's for dinner? From the Christian point of view. That's what most practitioners are doing.

Student: You're focusing on the world and not on the--

Professor Paul Freedman: You have to focus on the world. Supposing you wake up one morning and say, "I'm going to be a much more spiritual person." And then there's wailing from your kids, and your spouse is nagging you about fixing the dripping faucet. I mean this is stuff you've got to look forward to, most of you. I don't expect you to go into monasteries. But this is a distraction from what the New Testament tells you to do. The New Testament doesn't say, "Go ahead. Be happy. Amass property. Get a great job. Make a lot of contacts. Get ahead Have a bunch of children. Get them into good schools. Get them coaches for the SAT's." And so forth and so on.

If you have done that, because you just got trapped-- well, one thing led to another and here you are. If insofar as you have spiritual anxieties and desires, then you're going to want to have a patron. You're going to want to have someone who can intervene with you, just like way back when you had somebody write a letter recommendation because they were on the board of some company, or they had some influence. Here your patron is a spiritual patron, and it is monks or hermits.

So the role of the holy man in society is of somebody who has a heroic ability denied to most ordinary people. This is a spiritual superhero who, like comic book superheroes, isn't just a superhero for his own benefit. He doesn't just fly around because he likes the sensation of flying around. But who helps those who are weaker than him.

And the intervention of somebody-- a very important Saint like Simeon Stylites, transcended the merely curative. Simeon was without fear of the emperor, for example. What could the emperor do to him that was worse than living at the top of a pillar, after all? The emperor Constantius, one of the sons of Constantine in the early fourth century, was going to punish the city of Antioch for defying the tax collectors. Tax had been collected in Antioch. There'd been a riot. Lots of people were killed. Normally, you'd expect the wrath of the emperor to come down on the city and punish it very severely.

Simeon was able to intervene with Constantius to prevent this from happening. Constantius listened to him because he was a little scared of him. People are a little scared of those who are not only not playing the game, but who are playing a different game according to unique and very difficult to imitate rules. So there's a paradox here. Again, as the withdrawal from society becomes more dramatic, the imputed spiritual power becomes greater.

If Simeon's renunciation were limited to something kind of small. Suppose he became a vegan. Would people believe in his power? And then this brings up the question of, then, what is the power of The Rule of Saint Benedict? If you read The Rule of Saint Benedict, there's nothing in there about living outdoors all the time at the top of a pillar. There's nothing about extreme asceticism. Yet Benedictine monasticism would prove more durable than pillar sitting. It would prove more durable than the desert saints even.

Chapter 4: Monasticism in the West [00:25:18]

Monasticism was brought to the West in several forms. But generally speaking, although there are lots of hermits, we hear more about the communities of monks. Monks who live in an establishment. And beginning in the late sixth, and particularly in the seventh century, a lot of monasteries were established in rural parts of Europe, rural or small town parts of Europe. Places like St. Albans in England, which is not far from London. Or Bede's monastery of Jarrow in Northumbria, more remote. Or Fulda in Germany. Reichenau, a monastery in southwestern Germany on a little island in Lake Constance.

These monasteries owned property, and indeed many of them became very rich. Because one way of affiliating yourself with a monastery was to give to them, to donate land, money, serfs, coins, booty, whatever. And the reason people donated is because of the violence of their lives. The people who had the stuff to donate usually had gotten it by violence. Because it's a society that, as you've seen in the pages of Gregory of Tours particularly but not exclusively, it is a society organized around warfare.

All of these guys in Gregory of Tours have blood on their hands. You cannot be successful without a certain amount of the infliction of pain on other people. And although the rich and wealthy in any society do not believe themselves to be rich and wealthy for vicious reasons, indeed the rich and wealthy generally speaking think they're great. In this society, the rich and wealthy think they're great all right, but they're also very anxious.

It's not just a question of, what is the phrase that's often used by donors to universities, "give back to" Yale, for example, or give back to society. It's not just a question of giving back to society: "Yes, I made $40 billion, so I feel I need to give back something." It's a question of, "I'm going to hell. What can I do? I know I'm going to hell, because I killed 80 people in the course of just business deals. The closing of this deal required that 10 people be killed." Or 500, or 2,000.

So there is a symbiosis, to be cynical about it. And as you know, I'm not really a very cynical person. I hope that has come through. I hope it's come through that I'm a really idealistic, even naive. But if you'll forgive a moment of cynicism, there is a symbiosis between the monks, who are amassing this huge quantity of spiritual energy, and the leaders of society, who are amassing this huge quantity of sins. It's a natural trade agreement.

So there are paradoxical consequences of monastic wealth. As these places get richer and richer, they become too important to the kings, the leaders of society, just to be left to a bunch of weird, world-renouncing hermits. They start to be administered by people who themselves are from high families, of high lineage. In order to become a monk at Fulda or Reichenau, you can't just wander in and say, "I'm renouncing the world." You've got to be from a good family. You've got to come with an endowment. Generally speaking to get into Reichenau as a monk, the family's going to have to pay a huge amount of property, money, some form of wealth that endows that monk.

So at some point maybe people will stop believing that Reichenau is such a great place. Maybe they'll stop believing in its spiritual energy. This would happen later. But not yet. Not yet.

Chapter 5: Rule of St. Benedict [00:30:20]

The preservation of the monasteries and their growth and success is due to the rule of Saint Benedict. The most important development of Western monasticism-- and there are all kinds of other monasticisms in the Christian world. But the monasticism that would characterize Western Europe is the rule of Saint Benedict, late sixth century, who devised a set of regulations for communal monasticism.

So The Rule of Saint Benedict is a manual for the monastic life, how to set up and run a monastery. It's not the first. It's based on an older rule. We don't have to go into sort of who is responsible for inventing Benedictine monasticism, as it's called. But the monasteries of the West would be for the most part Benedictine until the twelfth century, when you start to have other orders. That is, there would be thousands of monasteries throughout Europe. And they would follow more or less the rule that you have read.

Why is this rule so successful? For one thing, it is moderate. It is reproducible on a large scale. It is ascetic, all right. It does involve giving up a lot of things, but not to an extreme. Not to be compared to the life of a desert hermit or a desert pillar-sitter. Or the harsh monasticism of the Irish tradition. You don't have to go to some little island that's one square kilometer large and out in the middle of the windy Irish sea, and build some little beehive hut and live there.

Ascetic monasticism of the extreme sort is all over the place. Because hostile environments are all over the place. Now it's not as if Benedictine monasteries are all located in cheerful, hilly, fertile countryside. But a lot of them are. A lot of them are located in productive land. But more important than that, they require a certain kind of asceticism. The asceticism of a Benedictine monastery is renunciation of self in favor of the community. In that sense, it's almost an opposite of the kind of monasticism that hermits or pillar saints practice.

What¡¯s ascetic about a Benedictine monastery is not only the celibacy part, or the prayer part, or the isolation from worldly stimulus part, but the fact that you're not alone most of the time. You have to subordinate your will to communal rituals and life. You have to subordinate your will to the abbot. Remember how much Benedict emphasizes obedience. This is not just a good management tool for making it clear who's in charge. It is a form of self-abnegation, a form of renunciation.

Benedict also enjoins manual labor. This is a penitential tool. But it's also something that has perhaps something to do with the economic success of these foundations. These are monks who are engaged in primarily two activities, labor and prayer. Prayer, we'll talk about in a moment And is quite understandable. But labor is more interesting and innovative. Because the ancient world despised labor. The whole idea of how you should live in pre-conversion Augustine's opinion, which reflects that of late Roman society, is what was called leisure with dignity.

Leisure with dignity is what most professors aspire to. That is to say, leisure but not just to take naps and play with your dog or surf various dubious sites on the internet. Leisure, to read, to think, to engage in a kind of genteel contemplation. And this is the ideal of those Roman senators who were writing philosophical dialogues. But work, actual work, is degrading, horrible in the ancient world. Not to be engaged in by anybody who could call himself a gentleman.

So by making people work, including people who come from the upper classes, this is a penitential labor indeed, particularly labor with your hands. Though other kinds of labor were envisaged. In Section 48, Benedict talks about labor and sacred reading. And this is one of those places where you can draw out from its meaning that copying manuscripts is a form of labor. Reading texts is a form of labor. So the transformation, or at least the addition of learning as part of the mission statement of monasteries, is implicit here, but certainly not drawn out by Benedict.

Prayer. One of the things that is involved in this surrendering of your will to the greater communal good is the performance of prayers. Benedict emphasizes humility. The monk's life as a ladder of humility. Humility is encouraged by obedience, silence. In Benedictine monasteries, you weren't silent all the time. But there is a discouragement against mere chatter. Labor, all of these are penitential activities in which the individual will is suppressed. And if you think of experiences in which the individual will is suppressed so that the person focuses on the community, we are all familiar, in fact you are more familiar than I am probably, more immediately, with such activities.

Any kind of training or boot camp-like thing, or a senior society, or an a-capella group, makes you do stuff with the group that may be unpleasant, difficult, self-sacrificing, but that reinforces the esprit de corps. This is the heart of the military. Military beats you up in order to make you focus on the group. And many other organizations, including businesses, this idea of going out into the mountains and turning you loose with a tent and some rope and seeing which groups are able to survive, or whatever they do.

This is part of this kind of training. It's not just to train you into depending on other people. It's to train you into focusing on the success of the organization or group as opposed to your own aggrandizement. The difference again is, you come back from the little upward bound experience. Or you come back from the retreat. Or you come back from the scavenger hunt. In this case, this is your life. But in addition to obedience, labor, silence, prayer is the most important renunciatory activity.

Because these are not just prayers like, "OK, I'm going to go in for five minutes and recite some prayers." These are prayers that go on all day with some breaks. One of psalms seems to suggest that you should make prayers seven times a day. So they begin a little bit after midnight. Then they go to sleep for a little while. And then they get up a little before dawn and they pray. And then they go back to sleep for a little while. And then they have a kind of early morning session, and so forth and so on, seven times a day.

And these are prayers they go through the psalms primarily. Different monasteries have different liturgies. A liturgy is a kind of ritual cycle. Some monasteries have more prayer and less contemplation, or less prayer and more work. But they all are engaged in the performance of group prayers, not individual but the community. And these go on and on and on. And they take on a kind of rhythm or a monotony, or a kind of visionary power that's such experiences can convey.

And it is these prayers that are what are really storing up those spiritual reserves I was talking about as characteristic of monasteries. There's this tremendous power that all these repeated prayers have that cannot be duplicated outside the walls of the monastery. So this heavy round of prayer involves a significant sacrifice of comfort and of the self. This is a kind of sleep deprivation. Monks never really quite make up the sleep deficiencies. They sort of stagger into Matins, as the first hours are called, or Lauds, the pre-sunrise hour. But this is very impressive to the outside world. The outside world, the donors, love this. They love the buildup of these prayers.

And they would like the prayers to take place in a nice place. Rather than having the monastery church being some kind of dank or fire trap wooden structure, they'll build beautiful churches for them and beautiful dormitories for them as well. And beautiful refectories for them. If you're a donor, you would rather that the stuff that you're donating for take place in nice surroundings. Donors like it if the lawns at Yale are well-clipped.

And I think I've said this before. The closest thing to a monastery is a college, with some obvious differences. But communal living? The quadrangle is like the cloister, focused in on itself. The emphasis on the group. Identification with the institution. The notion that your activities will benefit society. Not so much your prayers, but all that great research we're allegedly doing.

OK. The parallel does not carry perfectly. But it is no accident that this university looks a little bit like a monastery. It is to evoke a tradition of contemplation, isolation. People speak about the Yale bubble, but it's supposed to be a bit of a bubble. It was constructed that way. That is the ideal.

Now you may not have chosen to go to the places that really reproduce the monastic ideal. I went to the University of California at Santa Cruz. It was like up on a hill in a redwood forest. That was sort of like a monastery. Or Earlham College in Indiana, or Marlboro College in Vermont. I know you rejected these places, I know you just laughed at them just thinking about going to them. But there are people who've decided to go-- no? Devastated that you didn't get into Earlham? Well, OK. But this is an American ideal that is similar to the monastic ideal. It is a sort of renunciatory ideal. And it is an ideal of learning.

Chapter 6: Monasticism and Learning [00:43:33]

So how do we get to learning? In the last few minutes I just want to trace these connections. The Benedictine Rule, as you will have noticed, does not encourage learning. And Benedict himself did not regard this as a primary duty of monks. He did expect the monks to read the Bible. He expected them to listen to readings from the Church Fathers. And very key, he says that the monks should take out a book from what he calls the bibliotheca. "Bibliotheca" is the Latin word for library.

It's not clear when monasteries had libraries. But really the idea of collecting books and copying them comes from late Roman culture, from a desire to understand the Bible and from a transformation of that world of cultivated leisure, where the intellectuals like Augustine and his mentors, were the custodians of learning, to a world in which the clergy and particularly the monastic clergy, were the custodians of learning. Because the monks had three key elements: They had learning, that is they were literate. They had time, even though the prayers consumed a lot, they're not in the world. And they had wealth.

It's not inevitable that time, learning, and wealth should lead to a cultural efflorescence. But they are certainly favorable conditions. So I leave you with that implication of the rule. We will develop it further in a few weeks. What we're going to be talking about beginning on Monday of next week is Islam. So we are moving into a different post-Roman reality. Thanks.

Lecture 14 - Mohammed and the Arab Conquests [October 24, 2011]

Chapter 1: Islam and Its Arabian Context [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Now we're going to talk about Islam. And here we enter into a segment that, in a sense, is the most relevant, if relevance is a criterion, sort of is, to today's world. Because these controversies that play out today--Shiism versus Sunni, for example, the nature of Islam, its appeal as a religion on a world scale--are obviously established in the period that we're talking about.

They were established slowly. One of the things that you'll have noticed from the assignment is that the author, Berkey, emphasizes very much that Islam is slow in formation, that it's not fully grown as this militant movement with a set of rules in 632, the year that Mohammed dies. And because of that, then, it's not to be understood as some militant, conversion-oriented, jihado-centric religion from the start.

I said at one point when we were summarizing the end of the Roman Empire that there were three heirs to the Roman Empire. One was the Church--ironic because, of course, the Church had grown up persecuted by the Empire. The other was the Byzantine Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire. Remember that it called itself simply "the Roman Empire." So that's the most clear claim being staked to succession to the Roman Empire.

And that the third was Islam. And a couple of you said, well Islam, that's the most surprising of all, actually. And I didn't really elaborate at that time. And that's not the center of what we're going to be talking about. Because time moves on.

We're in the seventh century, the collapse of the Roman Empire in the west is established two and a half, two centuries earlier. But Islam, although developed in Arabia, outside of the Roman empire, and although very strong in places like Persia or the western part of India, would in many respects take up the inheritance of the Roman and Byzantine Empires.

The conquests on the Mediterranean, in the east, and in the south; its architectural and artistic style; its administrative structure; and not least, the translation and elaborations of Greek science, medicine, and other academic forms, including, for example, the translation of Aristotle and the influence of Aristotle would be signs of, evidence of the significance of Islam within--it's pointless to debate whether it's the Western tradition or what the Western tradition means--but within the classical legacy, within what it means to say that Rome as a polity ceased to exist in the west and yet the classical world has continued to influence society and ideas to this day.

So in talking about the history of Islam, one is inevitably going to be emphasizing its revolutionary nature. And so I'm going to go against the reading in some sense. Or the reading is intended to go against the conventional way of presenting the early history of Islam. And that can be sometimes annoying.

The writer is cautioning you against views you never had. Or the writer keeps on saying, "Well, we should not think that this"--and I hadn't thought that. Just tell me what you think happened in early Islam. My apologies for that. Writers are always writing against other writers. Scholars are always writing against a prevailing interpretation.

Berkey is a continuist, and that is the scholarly consensus now, arguing against this notion of Islam bursting forth like some kind of pent-up explosion in Arabia.

But Arabia is off the map. Islam as a movement, and certainly the Arab conquests, are unpredictable events. They may be understandable later in terms of developments in the Near East, both religious and cultural, but up until the seventh century Arabia was on the periphery of the two great controlling empires to its north, namely Persia and Rome. And we are taking Byzantium as the heir of Rome in this sense.

The problem with Arabia is that it is really dry. And before the discovery of oil, or more precisely, before the discovery that oil was useful, important, and valuable, it was a strikingly impoverished land in terms of natural resources. "A terrible land," as Isaiah the prophet says. Isaiah 21:1: "the burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through it, so it cometh from the desert, from a terrible land."

Now, Isaiah actually grew up in what most of us would consider to be pretty dry circumstances. The eastern Mediterranean, modern-day Israel, Lebanon, Syria are hot and dry compared to bounteous climes like New Haven.

So the Eastern Mediterranean, however, is a land of fertile oases, river valleys like the famed Tigris/Euphrates/Fertile Crescent area, coastal cities with commerce, whereas Arabia is essentially a vast expanse of barely habitable terrain. It is isolated by the sea on three sides. It has very few natural harbors. There are no lakes, no forests, no grasslands, even, and no rivers that run year-round.

The only intrinsically favorable part of it is the southwest corner, modern Yemen. This was in the ancient world, or at least to the Roman geographers, ¡°Arabia Felix,¡± Happy Arabia. Nice Arabia. And indeed, there were two kingdoms that emerged here around 1000 BC. Harbors, oases, and these two kingdoms controlled the spice and incense trade from India and from the Horn of Africa.

These are two extremely valuable kinds of products for religious, gastronomic, and medicinal purposes. And most of the spices come from India. And most of the incense comes from modern Somalia, Ethiopia, places along the Red Sea.

By the time of Mohammed, however, southern Arabia's best days had passed. And Mohammed is, of course, from central, and in the sense of its orientation, really, northern Arabia.

The worst desert in Arabia is the south. So just when you get out of Yemen going northeast you come to an area that still bears the not really encouraging name, the Empty Quarter. This is really serious, no-oases desert. Further north, however, in places like Mecca or Medina, there is enough water for settlement, though not enough for agriculture.

A key event in the history of Arabia is the domestication of the camel, which can be situated around 1000 BC. Arabia, outside of the Yemenite kingdoms, was mostly nomadic, though there were trading cities of which the most famous are Mecca and Medina. These cities were rather cosmopolitan. They had Arabs and other peoples. They had Christians, some of whom were Arabs, some of whom were not, and Jews, many of whom were also Arabs.

They controlled overland trade, again, from further east, bearing exotic products like spices from India, organizing caravans. At times they would form kingdoms, at times there would be Arab kingdoms in the north, but generally these are feuding societies organized along tribal lines.

Looked at from the Roman or Persian empire, Arabia was a little bit like the forests of Germany: a hostile terrain--from the Roman point of view, Persian point of view--inhabited by useful but presumably barbarian and presumably not very interesting people.

This is the point of view of the Bible as well. They are primitive people bearing interesting products, inhabiting a land that's not worth having. Not worth invading, not worth owning, not worth dealing with.

The first mention of Arabs seems to be 854 BC when, according to a Syrian inscription, a certain Gindibu, the Arab, contributed 1,000 camels to forces revolting against the Assyrians. The Arabs, henceforth, after 854 mentioned often in Babylonian and Persian texts. They're always frontiersmen or people inhabiting a land beyond a frontier.

Questions so far? OK.

Chapter 2: Bedouin Tribes [00:11:29]

Not all Arabs are nomads, but the Bedouin, Bedouin in this sense meaning Arab nomad, is sort of the Ur Arab, the original Arab, the defining archetype and the original colloquial meaning of the word Arab.

In a way the Bedouins are a little like the Germanic tribes, an analogy I'll mention but I don't want to push too hard. They form extended kinship units, that is to say they know who their second cousins are and care about them. And these extended kinship units form a kind of tribal structure.

This notion of tribe remains important to this day. You'll have seen, in accounts of post-Qaddafi Libya, for example, the clich¨¦, and probably accurate, is there is no tradition of government. Qaddafi didn't govern, he just tyrannized. And there are no civil institutions. It is divided by tribal loyalties.

What does tribe mean in that? I actually don't know in terms of Libya. It is a way of saying the people do not have loyalty to the state, but to some extended kinship group, or what's sometimes called "fictive kinship group." I'm not really related to you, but we have either the same name or we're from the same place or we consider each other kin and therefore have a certain protective sense about each other. This is very useful if you don't have a government.

We've already spoken about this in terms of our question of what held Merovingian society together. Your second cousin becomes important to you if there's no police force, if there's no way of making sure that someone is not going to kill you just for fun or because they got angry at you.

Under the circumstances we live in, we don't care about our second cousins. We don't know who they are. We don't expect anything from them. In a society in which family is not just a sentimental attachment, but it actually is what is protecting your life, kinship is very important. Bedouins as well as Germans, then.

The problem with kinship is that while it's a very solid attachment, it's also an irritant. And here we're not talking about arguments over whose Christmas is better or who gets the Venetian glass vase after Mom and Dad's death, we're talking about terrible arguments, feuds that are within a kinship group.

So you have feuds within the kin groups or tribes, and feuds between tribes, accentuated in this case often by water. Water, a scarce resource, obviously, and one that people fight about a lot in terms of territorial feuds. So the Bedouins tend to have more feuds than the Germans. There's no Bedouin equivalent of wergild.

Remember, the wergild is the price that you have to pay to make someone have peace with you, even if you've killed their relatives. It's the worth of a person. It's compensation. And then other people can be assessed on the basis of some tariff. So women may be 2/3 of a man, a pregnant woman may be one and a half times a man, and so forth.

We saw this in the Burgundian Code. Key to the Burgundian Code is this notion of compensation, that money related to the nature of the loss. One finger, two fingers, right hand, left hand, is compensation. Bedouin don't have that idea of compensation, of tariffs, of wergild.

In both the Bedouin and the German societies, the ruler has a limited amount of power. These are, I wouldn't want to say democratic societies in terms of some theory of representation, but they're not societies in which one person's will is obeyed unquestionably.

They are consultative. They are more like gangs in that sense. There's a leader, but his control is conditional on the loyalty of his most powerful subordinates. And his most powerful subordinates are quite capable of overthrowing him.

The Bedouin sheik is a little different from the Germanic king. And by Germanic king I mean not the kings that we've seen in the settled post-Roman, Merovingian empire, but the kings as described by Tacitus with possible greater or lesser accuracy. In the Germanic tradition, the king is a war leader. In the Bedouin tradition, the sheik is an arbiter, a settler of disputes.

Both societies exalted custom, and both had an exacting standard of masculinity. The Germans practiced agriculture and herded animals. The Bedouins don't have agriculture, and they supplement their herding of animals by raids on wealthier society.

These raids, called "razzia," are important because the Islamic conquests that we're going to be talking about on Wednesday may be said to begin as raids. They begin as raids, and then they discover that there's almost nobody there. That the Byzantine army and the Persian army are crippled by fighting against each other. So what begins by raids becomes conquests.

Chapter 3: Mohammed [00:18:07]

So we come to Mohammed. At first glance it would seem that Mohammed is a religious leader whose career takes place in what a French scholar of religion called "the full light of history." 620s AD may not seem like the full light of history, but Mohammed as a historical figure at least seems to emerge more clearly than Abraham or Moses or Jesus.

But, as you have read, Mohammed's biography is hopelessly entwined with legend. What we know about Mohammed is what later Islamic and Arab commentators wanted to have happened to Mohammed.

There are several sources for the life of Mohammed, and for thus the early years of Islam. There are formal biographies, called sira, S-I-R-A. The problem with these is they were written long after Mohammed's death--a hundred years, at least.

There are collections of oral tradition, called hadith, H-A-D-I-T-H, to which, similarly, there are sayings, proverbs. These are also questionable, because although they were put together within fifty years of Mohammed's death, they're very heavily influenced by the first civil war of the 650s, which we will be talking about the day after tomorrow.

And then there's the Koran, which is supposed to represent the words of Mohammed as composed by divine inspiration. The Koran itself is a text that scholars outside of the Islamic tradition have questioned in terms of when it was put together, how much by Mohammed, how soon after Mohammed.

The problem with all these sources is not that they are unreliable in the sense of fabrication, but that they tend to shape events in light of what the writers already know happens and in light of what they think should happen.

So that, as an example, we'll be talking about this in a moment, but you're all aware that in 622 Mohammed moves suddenly from Mecca to Medina. He maybe can be said to flee Mecca. This is called the Hegira, or Hijra in the Berkey book. H-E-G-I-R-A or H-I-J-R-A, depending on just how faithful you think you're being to the Arab original.

The Hegira is a key event in Islamic history. It is the point from which Islamic dating is done. That is to say the Islamic calendar starts with the Hegira. So this year is the year of the Hegira such and such. I can't do 2011 minus 622 immediately, but that's the Islamic year.

According to the traditional historical record, the Meccans tried to assassinate Mohammed, and he escaped, narrowly, this attempt. There's no real evidence of this degree of hostility on the part of people in Mecca. There's no evidence of an assassination attempt, or at least independent evidence.

And the assassination attempt seems to be something that is important for the story, for the way that the story is presented later, to dramatize something that may not have been at the time as dramatic as it seemed.

It may have been that the Meccans simply didn't listen to Mohammed and then he accepted an invitation to Medina. It may be that they were trying to sort of shut his movement down. But that they resorted to assassination does not seem to be very likely.

OK, so having given you all of these fatiguing caveats about what we do and do not know, let's say Mohammed was born between 570 and 580. He was born into a reasonably prominent but not really very affluent family of Mecca.

He may have been a merchant. It is usually assumed he was, and this is partly because the Koran has a lot of mercantile similes. In order to elucidate various points, comparison is made with trade, but there's no real evidence. We don't really know what he did for a living.

We know that he married well. His first wife, Khadija, K-H-A-D-I-J-A, was from a wealthy family, a higher class family than Mohammed's own.

And we also know that Mohammed got his start as a religious thinker, as a prophet, at the age of forty, an encouragement to those of us who are slow to get our careers off the ground. The discouraging part is that his career only lasts a relatively brief time. He dies ten years after the Hegira, but he does accomplish an awful lot.

What was his religious experience? What was the revelation vouchsafed to him that he preached to the citizens of Mecca beginning around 615 to 620? It is certainly a message of monotheism against what was considered to be a prevailing paganism, or polytheism on the part of the merchants and tribesmen of Arabia.

But as we've said, Arabia had lots of Jews and Christians as well. And it's a little tricky to tell how much Mohammed would have known about Judaism and Christianity. But it looks as if he did. And indeed, it looks as if his preaching begins as a kind of biblical monotheism for the Arabs.

It is a message to the Arabs congruent with the message of Judaism and Christianity, the message of Judaism and Christianity being understood as a statement of the unity of God and a progressive interpretation of God's message by a series of prophets, a series of prophets beginning with Abraham, including Moses, Isaiah, Jesus, according to Islam, and Mohammed. Mohammed is then in the line of prophets.

The degree to which this means that Islam takes on its own identity is hard to say. And the tendency of scholars outside of the Islamic tradition, that is people like Berkey, is to say it takes quite a while. Takes quite a while for there to be the confidence that Islam is a religion that is different from Judaism and Christianity, while it is clear from the start that the people who are embracing it are different, even though there are Arab and Jewish Christians, and we'll see what that means in a moment.

Mohammed's first converts are his family circle and a group of key friends. And they're all important historically. His wife, his cousin Ali, who would marry his daughter Fatima, a merchant named Abu Bakr, a powerful member of one of the leading clans or family groups of Mecca, Uthman, sometimes spelled--I think in the Berkey book spelled with a U, so we'll use the U.

Uthman, right, Ali, I've mentioned, Abu Bakr. Uthman is a member of the Umayyad family. And Omar. These are sort of considered to be the inner circle of very, very early converts.

As I said, according to tradition the ruling circles of Mecca became fearful as what had been a fringe movement started to gain more converts. The people who ruled Mecca feared that their control was slipping from their grasp, and they feared that this new movement was popular with a lower class.

The leading clan of Mecca were the Quraish. These are the people who are most powerful in Mecca and begin as the enemies of Mohammed and are responsible for driving him out, if indeed he was driven out.

Chapter 4: Mohammed in Medina and the Differentiation of Islam [00:29:20]

In 622 the city of Medina, another merchant center, invited Mohammed to come as a kind of arbiter or ruler who was above factions and who could then settle their internecine disputes.

This is not an uncommon pattern. You'll see it in late medieval and Renaissance Italy, in fact. The podest¨¤ in Italian cities is an outsider who is empowered with very extensive police powers to quell feuds. In Romeo and Juliet, for example, there's a podest¨¤, but he's not able to solve the feud. But that's the kind of scene that we can imagine as the western equivalent of Medina.

Muhammad is invited as a wise man, as an arbiter, as a reconciler to the city of Medina, an offer that he accepts. And it is in Medina that we really start to see emerge what can be called an Islamic identity. I tend to think a little bit earlier than Berkey, because here Islam starts to differentiate itself from Judaism and Christianity. And indeed, the period at Medina culminates with the expulsion of Jewish groups who refuse to accept Mohammed.

What he does at Medina also is to preach that the religious loyalty is more important than loyalty to the tribal group. The religious loyalty therefore is not simply a accompaniment to your already existing identity; it is the most important aspect of your identity.

It's at Medina that Mecca replaces Jerusalem as the point of orientation for prayer. It's at Medina that Mohammed stopped celebrating Yom Kippur and institutes a month-long fast during the daylight hours, Ramadan. At Medina, Friday becomes the Sabbath, not Saturday or Sunday.

And the Jews are expelled from Medina. And by Jews I don't mean some kind of foreign community of non-Arabs who happen to be living in Medina, but rather Jews, some of whom came from elsewhere, many of whom were Arabs.

And it's also here that Mohammed perfects this notion as against the Christians and Jews who have scorned him that he is the Seal of the Prophets, the last of the prophets. From Abraham to Jesus, now to Mohammad. This is the last prophecy.

God's message has not been packaged into one deal, one file too large for one email attachment. And it's come in a bunch of them, and this is it. Here are all the cute cat pictures and all of the-- the whole file, which you now can download in segments. But it's over. This is it. The Jews and Christians are wrong to think that either it ended with Elijah or that the be all and end all of all prophecy was Jesus. No. No. This is the truth.

But keep in mind that Islam did, and at least is supposed to, respect Judaism and Christianity as not merely precursors, but as part of the same tradition. "People of the Book" is the term often used in Islam to describe Judaism and Christianity. They share the same, if not scripture exactly, but the same kind of historical religious orientation.

The criticism that Islam can make against Christianity is that it tends to be polytheistic. And as you know, Islam expands great care to make sure that the human form does not appear in art. And in some forms of Islamic art that not even animals appear. Depiction of the human figure is proscribed.

Great care is made in differentiating Mohammed from what Muslims see as the exaggerated stature of Jesus. Mohammed is a prophet. He is a messenger of Allah, not to be identified with Allah himself. There is no depiction of Mohammed. People do not have pictures of him in their houses. There are no statues to him.

Mohammed's greatest challenge was to overcome these tribal loyalties in favor of the umma, U-M-M-A, the community of the faithful. He allowed property and marriage to be decided still by tribal tradition, but prohibited feuds and required that disputes be arbitrated in religious courts.

This is important. Because Mohammed, like the rabbis of the Diaspora in Judaism, is both a religious leader and a judge. He is a community leader and a spiritual leader. And indeed, these two things are not really distinguished.

I emphasize this because it's really different from Christianity. In Christianity, there's a church and there's a legal, secular state. Sometimes, and of course the Middle Ages to some extent defined by this, the Church will have what look like secular powers. We've talked about this with regard to the bishops and Gregory of Tours. At times the papacy, later, would claim all sorts of political powers.

But conceptually in Christianity, because Christianity was an illegal religious brotherhood within the Roman Empire for over two centuries, church and state are different.

In Islam, one can't really talk about church or clergy. There are religious leaders who have political authority, but their authority is what we would call that of a judge and that of a religious leader at the same time. The political order and the religious community are the same.

That's why when we talk about the Arab conquest or the Islamic conquest, we're talking about something in which the new territories are taken over by a state that's not a theocracy in the sense of the church's ruling the state, but something in which the church and state are not to be distinguished. We'll talk about this more when we come to the conquests. Within two years of the Hegira, 622, so by 624 Mohammed was planning to take over Mecca, to re-enter in triumph the city that he had fled, if not under cover of darkness at least under murky circumstances. A victory in battle in 624 gave Mohammed the confidence to expel Jews and Christians from Medina and to take on this title of Seal of the Prophets.

And by 627 Medina gained the upper hand, and in 630 Mecca fell to Mohammed and his forces. And all of the tribes of Mecca and of the surrounding areas submitted to Mohammed. They recognized him as a political as well as religious leader. Again, the two things not easily to be distinguished.

And then Mohammed died. In 632 he died, and what is remarkable is that the momentum he established was able to survive his demise. Because most of the tribes probably thought that their loyalty was to him as a prophet and a person, and not to some sort of institution that would survive his death.

And indeed, his death would usher in a period of incredibly rapid expansion. Within a few years of Mohammed's death, Damascus, the great city of the eastern Mediterranean, Byzantine Damascus, would fall to the Arabs, the first of many such conquests that we will be marching through on Wednesday. But this question of religious loyalty would be exacerbated by splits within Islam, which we'll also be describing.

Chapter 5: The Tenets of Islam [00:39:14]

The tenets of Islam, just to close by way of our last remarks for the day. Islam means "surrender." And to surrender oneself to the power of Allah is the beginning of wisdom, beginning of faith. Acknowledgement of Allah is acknowledgement a strict monotheism, acknowledgement of Mohammed as the messenger prophet of Allah, and as the last prophet.

The so-called "five pillars of Islam" are duties incumbent on the believer. And these are the confession of faith that I just mentioned, daily prayers, five times a day, the giving of alms, the observance of Ramadan, and the performance of the pilgrimage to Mecca if that's possible.

What's not there is interesting, too. What's not intrinsic to Islam is a strong sense of sin. The Arabs do not like the Confessions of Saint Augustine, are not interested in this particular form of spiritual investigation. The believer can pray directly to Allah. There is really no Islamic clergy in the sense of presiding over sacraments or channels of grace.

The mosque is a gathering place; it is not a place that has some kind of powerful holy objects in it, in the sense that a church in this era would have relics or Eucharistic hosts and other very powerful, sacred things.

Islam is a religion of conduct and law, not of mortification and purgation. It emphasizes upright behavior: no drinking, no gambling, certain dietary restrictions. Not the renunciation of the world--it does not say, "Sell everything you have and give it to the poor." It says, "Give alms."

It is a moderate religion, actually. It is a ¡°do-able¡± religion. These obligations may be somewhat inconvenient at times, Ramadan for example, but there is nothing in here to the degree that the New Testament, for example, proscribes [correction: prescribes] behavior that most people are not going to follow.

Or that traditional Judaism, possible but certainly onerous. Lots of obligations. The other difference, more important, with Judaism is that Islam would be very quickly universal. In other words, it would encourage conversion, although not, as we will see, with great enthusiasm.

It is completely erroneous to think that these armies that burst forth from Arabia after the death of Mohammed were intent of getting everybody to follow Mohammed. They were intent on conquest, all right. But we'll see that their goals were a little more complicated than that of orienting everybody towards this new faith, whatever we're going to call it. And we'll see more about that the day after tomorrow. Thanks.

Lecture 15 - Islamic Conquests and Civil War [October 26, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction: Apparent Paradoxes of Islamic Conquest [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: OK, so Islam, Part Two. I know there's a lot of new terminology, new narratives. The things that I want you to keep in mind are what we're really going to focus on today and that is the Islamic conquests, which certainly take place partly because of religious motivation, but nevertheless are not accompanied by some fanatical desire to convert the world. The Muslim conquests have to be understood in terms of religious motivation but not in terms of a determination to wipe out Judaism and Christianity.

What appears to be a paradox makes this era a little hard to understand. Namely, the paradox being that you would have such a rapid expansion of the Arabs and the religion that they carried, which eventually would extend from Spain to India. And at the same time that the Islamic population would be a minority in most of those conquered regions for centuries. There is not a demand for the conversion of the population to Islam, and that although the conversion does take place, in many, in most parts of this imperial caliphate, it doesn't take place immediately and it doesn't take place under great pressure. I say apparent paradox because, in fact, the two things are different.

The motivation provided by the religion to conquer does not necessarily mean that you require that everybody that you conquer embrace the religion. Indeed, in part, this is because, as Berkey emphasizes, the distinctiveness of the religion was worked out over the course of its first century, beginning as we said last time in Medina but not fully articulated until the change of dynasty in 750 from the Umayyad to the Abbasids. But the other reason is that there's no logical connection between conquest and conversion. It's perfectly possible to be a motivated conqueror and not to require that other people embrace your religion and this is for reasons that we'll see.

The other apparent paradox, and here I think there really is a paradox, is that the Islamic conquests are accompanied by internal division within Islam from 650 AD. By the time of the Abbasid succession, it is a century later, these two parties can be identified as Sunni and Shiite.

And you've read that and you're aware that this continues to be a division that defines an awful lot of the Islamic world today. It is particularly a problem in those countries such as Iraq, for example, that have both Sunni and Shiite populations. It's not a problem in Morocco where everybody is Sunni. And it is less of a problem in contemporary Iran where a very large majority is Shiite. But it is a problem that defines both Islam as a religion and the politics of many countries to this day. And so one of the things we have to talk about in a lecture entitled ¡°Islamic Conquest and Civil War¡± is the origins of the split within Islam. The paradox is that the conquests keep on going even while it would seem that religious unity is falling apart.

Chapter 2: Mohammed¡¯s Successors and the Beginnings of Conquest [00:04:01]

Now as you remember, I hope, after Mohammed's death, there was no clear succession. He didn't have a son, and it wasn't clear what anyone would succeed to. If he was the seal of the prophets, then you couldn't succeed to prophecy. Was he a religious ruler, was he a military ruler, was he a judicial arbitrator? His father-in-law, Abu Bakr, who we saw was one of the first of his followers, was elected caliph-- caliph meaning ¡°successor¡±, simply. Succeeding to what was not defined, but to some kind of combination of religious and secular rule. As we said last time, religious and secular rule are, in a fundamental way, not separated in Islam, although as we're going to start to see and as you've read, there are some ways in which they do start to separate out, particularly in the later Abbasid period.

Abu Bakr was elected, that is the followers of Mohammed, the people who were thought to have some sort of original religious authority, elected him. His rival was Ali, the cousin of Mohammed and the son-in-law, at the same time of Mohammed. Ali had married Fatima, the daughter of Mohammed. But this election was not recognized by many of the tribes that had regarded their loyalty to Mohammed as personal loyalty to Mohammed, not to some institution and not to some permanent coterie of caliphs or successors. So they refused to recognize Abu Bakr's authority and there ensued what's called the ridda, R-I-D-D-A, or apostasy, where the tribes rejected the authority of Abu Bakr, and Abu Bakr militarily compelled them back into submission or recognition of his authority.

Abu Bakr ruled for less than two years, but he had already started on a key aspect of the ridda, the apostasy, and, that is, turning the resistance to the apostasy into a war against external enemies. In other words, the military energy that had to be devoted to bringing these tribes back in, once they were brought in, was continued to turn their military energies outward. And outward means to the north, out of the Arabian desert and to the direct north and slightly northeast, meaning Persia, to the northwest meaning the Byzantine Empire.

And already under Abu Bakr , it was discovered that the Byzantine Empire and the Persian Empire were hollowed out and that what began as raids to keep these discontented tribes happy with a spot of plunder turned into a conquest. And as success breeds success-- and I don't think there's any more dramatic lesson of that clich¨¦-- the ambitions of the conquerors changed very quickly; well the ambitions of the raiders changed very quickly, from booty to conquest, from plunder to an expansion of territory.

Remember that the Persians and the Byzantines had fought each other, that in 626 Persia besieged Constantinople unsuccessfully-- 626, four years after the Hegira. So from the Islamic/Muslim/Arab point of view, the timing was great. These two great empires had exhausted each other militarily and to some extent spiritually as well. In 634, in other words two years after the death of Mohammed, the city of Damascus fell to the Arabs. Damascus, the capital of Byzantine Syria, indeed one of the oldest cities in the world, mentioned in the Old Testament of the Bible, an extremely important center of government, commerce, and religion fell. The Byzantine Empire was defeated near Jerusalem.

Abu Bakr died in 634 and again Ali was passed over in another election in favor of another companion of Mohammed, Umar, another one of those original followers that we mentioned in the last lecture. Umar would rule from 634 to 644. He was a startlingly effective ruler.

In the ten years of his caliphate, the Arabs conquered the Persian Empire entirely. An empire that had lasted for centuries, that had been one of the great world empires, collapsed and was taken over by Islam,by the Arabs. The Byzantine Empire didn't completely collapse, but in this period it lost Syria, Palestine, and then its richest agricultural province, Egypt. Alexandria, capitol of Egypt at the time, surrendered in 642.

Chapter 3: Factors Favoring Arab Conquest [00:10:08]

We can list the factors that favor the Arab conquest, though they're mostly sort of favorable soil, as it were, not the plant itself. Weakness of Persia and Byzantium, I've already mentioned. A mastery of desert warfare. We'll see this with the Vikings at the end of the course. There are peoples who have been able to take advantage of an adverse environment that they are able easily to swim through, travel through, and that a less mobile adversary cannot deal with. So the similarity between the sea and the rivers of Europe and the desert of the Near East is that you can pick and choose your battles. You appear off the coast. "Uh oh. There's an army there. We'll just go back and then we'll raid somewhere else."

The same is true of the desert. You appear out of the desert where the urban dwellers cannot easily field an army. And you discover that there's nobody defending the city and you take it. Or you discover there is somebody defending the city. You go right back into the desert; they can't pursue you there and you pick somewhere else. So the mastery of desert warfare is in part a question of mobility and the ability to move in the desert freely, easily.

Another aspect of the weakness of Persia and Byzantium is the discontent of their religious minorities. Persia was ruled by a Zoroastrian elite and had other religious groups that felt, if not persecuted, at least discriminated against. And as we've seen, the Byzantine Empire had a substantial Monophysite population that was persecuted by the orthodox. These people might not exactly fight for the invader but they certainly weren't unhappy when the invader showed up.

Indeed, remember that I said that in 655, there was a naval battle. How could the Arabs have sailors if they hadn't seen a year-round river until a few years before this battle? Their sailors were, most of them, from Monophysite populations of Egypt and Syria. They were able to recruit people who would fight for them who were not Muslim.

The third is the channeling of a war-like society towards external fighting. This is like a problem of conservation of energy. You have a certain amount of energy that is being expended in external fighting. If you can turn all those electrons or whatever in the same direction and make them go outward, they will be extremely powerful. Limits of my scientific knowledge, unfortunately, you see displayed. But you understand what I'm talking about. That is, the internecine warfare is now turned outside because the plunder is better, the motivation is better.

And then motivation is a fourth reason. Religious motivation is this thing that is called jihad. Everybody knows what this means. And we're going to have to grapple with it because our understanding of it is perhaps partial and distorted. Jihad means struggle. It is a struggle against other religions or against other tendencies within Islam. There's plenty of energy, as we will see, devoted to fights within Islam. Internecine religious fighting if not tribal feuding.

So we use the term jihad with some reservations. It is wrong to think of the Arab conquest as an expression of jihad in the sense that guys with knives in their teeth ride out and offer a terrorized population the choice of death or conversion. Once again, it is possible to have a religious motivation and yet not necessarily want to kill or convert the conquered people. The Quran itself has plenty of information about the jihad but it is not completely consistent. Certainly there is a sense that the unbelievers must be combated. A sense of martyrdom even--that those who died in the struggle to advance the religion will receive special favor.

But there is also a respect accorded to people of other religions, in particular, Jews and Christians. And if you think about it, it is psychologically possible to be convinced that God is following you. God must be following you. After all, you just conquered Jerusalem, you just conquered Alexandria, you just came out of the desert and have started to a roll like a tsunami-- an image I don't think is really in the Quran. Well, let's say roll like the sands of the desert over ancient civilization. So God must be with you. But the fact that God is with you may indicate that you're an elite and that the people that you conquered are simply going to stay that way. Or that if they want to become Muslim, that makes sense. Obviously Got favors Islam. If they don¡¯t want to become Muslim, that's their lookout.

So it does not mean that you have a hostile conquest policy. Jihad is, in this context, not incompatible with tolerance. "Tolerance" is a word I use with caution as well. Because it's not as if they have a modern ideal of tolerance, of individuality, of "You have your religion, I have my religion." It is more that they are not bothered by the presence of people of other religions. And we'll see some of why that is. So, number five, a policy of allowing conquered people to maintain their religion, livelihood, and private lives.

So there are other rapid conquests in world history, and there are other rapid conquests by people who are technologically or culturally or certainly economically behind the people that they conquer. The Mongols conquer an incredible territory. The Vikings, which we will end the course with, are certainly less developed, economically, less civilized, than the Carolingian Empire that they plunder. What is unusual about Islam, and I reiterate something that I've said already, perhaps more than once, is that it has a permanent effect. Rather than disappearing back into their yurts, like the Mongols, or disappearing back into the tundra- well that's an unfair description of Scandinavia- but disappearing back into the north like the Vikings, the Islamic powers not only stay as occupiers but become, themselves, a cultivated, wealthy, highly civilized empire. What is unusual about the Arabs, then, is their ability to consolidate and to hold onto their conquests.

OK, I think I said before there are three startling things about Islam: the career of Mohammed, the rapidity and extent of the conquests, and this business of the cultural adaptability, consolidation, of the Arab conquerors.

Questions so far? I think that the conquest part of this is clearer than the internal divisions.

Chapter 4: Arab Conquests [00:18:43]

So let's proceed with the conquests rapidly. There's no single regime, there's no rule issued by the Caliphate for conquest policy. In general, if the population surrendered on terms the way Alexandria had in 642, that was fine. Then the people were allowed to keep their local customs. In other words, they were allowed to keep their houses, their jobs, their religion, their property. The Arabs were intent on plunder, however. Why didn't they just pillage these people?

Some of it is just wisdom. They are thinking they're going to have to govern these places and that they might as well harness the industry and enterprise of the population rather than kill them or disperse them. Some of it was, I think, that they had so much plunder available to them from other sources that they didn't have to bother with some middle-class artisan¡¯s wealth. They could plunder churches. They could seize Church lands. They could take the state treasury. Between them, the state and the Church held so much wealth, that the Arab conquerors didn't really want to bother with mere private property. The leading nobles tended to flee. They allied their interests with the state. They were very large property owners; that land could be confiscated.

And the reward to the conquerors was to be settled on lands of their own, with tenants of their own, and these lands tended to have belonged to the state or to the Church. They received long leases for these lands from the Caliphate, and they paid a religious tax, a kind of tithe, as members of the umma, the religious community.

Non-Muslims were allowed to keep their property, their land and other property, but they had to pay two taxes that Muslims did not. They had to pay what is called in the English-speaking world a poll tax, which is basically just a head tax. Every person or every household pays a certain amount of money. It's actually kind of like a flat tax, but it has nothing to do with income. It is simply that you as a person living in this polity pay this as a tax. And then a land tax. Land tax obviously more variable depending on how much land you own. If you own x amount of land, you pay a tax. If you own 8x amount of land, you pay eight times that tax, at least that is the theory.

And given that, as we said, as far back as Diocletian, you need to have very good records to keep track of taxes, then they kept on the old officials who had those records. So the language of administration in Syria remains Greek for quite a while; in Egypt, it remains Greek; in Persia, it remains Persian, because the guys that are running it are basically the same guys who are running it under the old empire. Why would the Arabs want to get rid of them? They would want to get rid of the high officials, the nobles, but the functionaries, the bureaucrats, stayed on. Most people who were Christians or Jews paid no more tax to the conquerors than they had to the Byzantine or Persian Empire. In other words, they were conquered, their lives did not radically change, their taxes did not go up. They didn't really miss the Persian or Byzantine imperial regimes.

The question, however, is why are the Arabs so tolerant? And this surprises people who assume that Islam has always been spread with a kind of totalizing militancy. In fact, for a time, the conquerors didn't encourage conversion because you can see the consequences of conversion for taxation. If eighty percent of the population is Jewish and Christian, then eighty percent of the population is in a high tax bracket. If you are running things, it¡¯s to your interest that they not convert to that very low ten percent tax bracket or whatever the zakat, the religious tax is. "Go ahead and have fun. It's Sunday, go to church, don't bother me, pay your taxes," would be a fairly common attitude on the part of the conquerors.

And of course there's a respect for Christianity and Judaism that I've already mentioned. Some of it is confidence that eventually people are just going to see that Islam is more successful. Up until the Abbasid regime, 750, a vast majority of the conquered territory remained in the religion that it had had before the conquest. In other words, in Egypt in 750, a majority of the population were Christian. And indeed in Egypt, to this day, ten percent of the population is Christian. Certainly, Islam would gain. And certainly now, ironically, much more than in 800 AD or 1200 AD or 1500 AD or 1900 AD, it's tough to be a Christian in Egypt. This is a problem of modernity, not of the period we are dealing with.

Chapter 5: Internal Divisions [00:25:05]

So the process of conquest is very rapid. The process of Islamization is not. They are not to be confused. Amidst all these triumphs, the caliph experiences divisions that culminated in a civil war between 656 and 661.

And the origins of it seems to be the murder of Caliph Umar in 644. He was murdered by a Persian Christian. So it's not a Muslim assassination. But it ushered in another disputed election. And Ali, poor guy, presented himself yet again as the successor of Mohammed.And again he was defeated, this time by Uthman. Uthman, along with Abu Bakr and Umar, we mentioned him as one of the original followers of Mohammed. Uthman was a member of a prominent clan, the Umayyads, a high status Mecca family. High status, but the Umayyads had opposed Mohammed. Uthman was an exception but his family were among those people of Mecca who had been the most steadfast in opposing this upstart guy.

So to some, especially the followers of Ali, Uthman appeared to be a representative of a not really staunch Islamic family. They were not fervent new followers. Why was Ali passed over so many times? It's not clear. Here again, we are in a very controversial area in which a lot of later tradition elaborates reasons for things that may not have anything to do with what the reality was in 644. You start to have pro-Ali parties or traditions. This is what would become the Shiite party and pro-Umayyad or pro-Caliphate traditions, that of the Sunnis. Neither of which is completely to be relied on because obviously they are biased.

Under Uthman, the pace of conquest continues. This naval battle in 655 took place-- the Battle of the Masts-- in which the Byzantine navy was defeated by the Arab navy. This meant that islands in the Mediterranean start to fall to the Arabs. Cyprus was conquered in 649, Rhodes in 654. Meanwhile, in the former Persian Empire, the eastern part of Iraq, tending over towards Persia, was conquered in 651-653. Armenia, north and west of Persia, east of Anatolia, the area where the earthquake was recently, was conquered in 653-655.

But Uthman was particularly disliked by much of the population. Unlike Umar, unlike the early caliphs, he was regarded as lethargic and as a sensualist, let's say. Lethargic and profligate, a lover of luxury, a monarch rather than a leader, a corrupt ruler. And he was murdered by a Muslim in 656. Here we have the first assassination of a caliph by another member of the faithful.

And Ali was proclaimed as caliph. The problem here is that Ali was proclaimed caliph by the people who had assassinated Uthman. Or at least he was perceived as taking the title from the bloodied hands of assassins. Whether he knew in advance of the plot against Uthman is doubtful. But he starts off in a somewhat false position as caliph. He is opposed bitterly by the Umayyad family. But more than that, his claim to the caliph is tarnished by the circumstances under which he came into it.

And an Umayyad rose up against him and starts the first civil war of Islam. This is Mu'awiya, the governor of Syria who revolts in Damascus and leads a party against Caliph Ali. In fact, this gives rise to a militant group of people who hate both claimants. Ali is assassinated, and Mu'awiya is wounded. Now Mu'awiya survives but the tendency within Islam to dispose of enemies by violent means has been sanctioned by the events of this period.

So 661, the civil war is over. Mu'awiya moves the capital from Medina to Damascus. He establishes the Umayyads as a dynasty, and they would rule as caliphs until 750. What does this move from Medina to Damascus mean? It certainly is a part of the de-Arabization of the definition of the caliphate. Damascus is not an Arab city, at least in its origin. It was part of the Byzantine Empire. It is more centrally located than Medina in terms of administering the Empire. It's also more cosmopolitan. It has a lot of different kinds of people.

So the move is away from the Arab heartland to a place where the population is not necessarily Arab. It is part of the transformation of the caliph from what we would call religious leadership to that of a kind of kind of monarch, king. The caliph lives in a city. He lives in a palace. He has an immense entourage. The days of the tents in Arabia or of quasi-nomadic followers of Mohammed are definitively over with the defeat of Ali. Defeat, but it's not a complete defeat.

Sh'ia means party or to its opponents faction. And for a long time, the Shiites are like the perpetual losers who cannot at the same time be eliminated. They are a minority within Islam. They are, at various times, seemingly overwhelmed by the wealth, armies, power of the caliphs. But they never go away and they never abandon their claims. They form, thus, a permanent dissenting group within Islam. What is the nature of that dissent? What don't they like about Islam as it's practiced by the majority? Any sense of that from this admittedly busy reading? It's key that you understand what Shiism is and what its grievances are.

Student: Do they reject the caliph as a religious figure?

Professor Paul Freedman: They reject the caliph as a religious figure. Do they reject him because he's not the descendant of Ali? Partly. Part of this is a succession question. They reject the caliph because he's illegitimate. So it's kind of like a dynastic question. The only real caliphs-- and they don't use the term caliph. They start to use the term "imam" as you've read. The only real religious leader is not the guy sitting in Damascus in his palace with the splish-splashing fountains and scented perfumes everywhere. But to what extent do they reject the caliphate as such apart from the dynastic question? How would you describe Shiite political theory? If the Sunnis are monarchical, if they are comfortable with a caliph who rules over an Empire of unbelievable extent, what might the Shiites prefer to see? OK, Spencer?

Student: The government of the consensus of the umma, the community of the faithful.

Professor Paul Freedman: And something more informal. Indeed, although I hesitate to use this term, they are republican. Republican, not in the twenty-first or twentieth century American sense. What does republican mean in this context?

Student: Choosing representatives to then carry out the will of the people.

Professor Paul Freedman: Yes, anti-monarchical. They regard the caliph as a sort of George III of the Muslim world. They don't want to have a single ruler who is a political ruler. They're comfortable with rulership in at least some sense. But the rulership should be either elected or inspired. They are radicals, in part because they're dissenters. They're on the out, in part because they are really angry and they countenance violent tactics of opposition. They are egalitarian and that's sort of what I mean by republican. It's not so much that they necessarily believe in a representative system as that they believe in a system in which one class of believers is not exalted over another. And one person is not ruling merely because he comes from a certain background.

Now what happens when religious movements are frustrated? That is, when they are objects of repression? Because indeed the Shiites were not particularly tolerated by the caliph. Often, such religious groups become fixated on a future in which their claims will be vindicated. This certainly makes sense.

The Christians persecuted under the Roman Empire wrote the granddaddy of all prophetic texts, prophetic of the destruction of your enemies: the Book of Revelations. I suggest that you take a look at that anyway as it's always interesting reading. And it is the book of the Bible that has the most relevance, for better or worse, to the current world we live in because it's the one that talks constantly about the future and what's going to happen. Is that future the Apple computer future where everybody's wonderfully connected and we all can just float in some kind of great brain that we participate in? Or is the future some terrible ecological disaster in which we'll be cannibals and stuff? Or is the future the visitation of those angels, those candlesticks, those flowing rivers of molten metal as in the book of Revelations? Trumpets all over the place. Will 1/3 one-third of the population be wiped out one day and then another? third the next day? The narrator of the Book of Revelations cannot wait for this to happen.

It is in the nature of apocalyptic thinking that it is violent, because your enemies, who are right now persecuting you, are going to be confounded. And they're not going to be confounded in the, "Oh gee, I'm really sorry I persecuted you," sense. They are going to be split apart and pulverized. And you're going to be watching and you're going to be applauding while they're split apart and pulverized and tortured. That's the nature of messianic, apocalyptic thinking. Apocalyptic meaning the end of the world in some kind of conflagration, messianic meaning the presence of a savior. The two are not the same thing, but they tend to go together because there's going to be somebody who's going to come and, amidst the bloodshed and the fire, usher in a millennial world. That is to say, a world in which bad things have been purged. And that messiah may be Jesus Christ at the second coming. It may be the messiah of Jewish tradition. Or in Shiite Islam, it may be the imam, the rightly guided imam. The Shiites have a leader. I just said that they are republican and egalitarian, but they're not some kind of Occupy Wall Street, we don't have any leaders, anarchic group. They have leaders but they are leaders who are inspired, not merely administrators of a huge bureaucracy. And these imams succeed each other and are recognized by the Shiite faction until the death of the eleventh imam -- the death of the eleventh imam without any obvious successor. Who is the twelfth imam? And we enter into this period of what the book calls "occultation". Not a word that you find used. Well, it's got some sort of medical meaning too. Occultation, meaning what? Come on, this is in the reading.

He's gone into hiding. Occult means hidden. There is a twelfth imam. We just don't know where he is. He's in a cave somewhere. And there are imams and imams after him. Either he is deathless or there are other imams. But they're all hidden because they're not ready yet. But when they are ready, centuries of grievance are going to be revenged.

So there's a notion of a corrupt and misguided Islamic establishment and of a true subterranean occult, righteous level of the practice of the religion.

So Shiism tends to apocalyptic thinking, to prophecy. It exalts Ali and his followers. And it feels that it is in touch with the original desert, austere, egalitarian roots of Islam that have been corrupted by the monarchical, suspect purity of the Sunni caliphate.

Who becomes a Shiite? This is a hard question to answer because it is more than just a party or faction. If it was just a party or faction, it could not have lasted into the contemporary world with the force that it has. Who is discontent under Islam? It would seem logical that the people who would be discontent would be non-Arabs because there is increasingly, as the Islamic world takes shape, a population of people who do convert to Islam who were not Arabs. We've said that the pace of Islamization was slow but, nevertheless, it was persistent and logical. It's logical that people should have converted to Islam, not only because it is a religion that to this day attracts lots of converts because it has a religious appeal and, as I have argued, it's a do-able religion.

It's a religion that does not have a huge number of self-mortifying precepts. It is a way of living a righteous life in the world and performing certain duties that are not tremendously onerous or very subtle and involve a lot of mental internal dialogue. So people are converting to Islam. These people are known collectively as mawali, singular, mawal. A mawal is a non-Arab Muslim. In the early years, by definition, a convert.

The day that Damascus fell, there were no Muslims in Damascus except maybe for some Arab traders. As of the death of Mohammed, all Muslims were Arabs. But within decades of this, with the conquests and conversion, there are lots of non-Arab Muslims. They may need to learn Arabic to understand the Koran. They're supposed to go to Mecca and so forth. But they are not Arabs. Are they equal to Arabs? Well, Arabs are always, to this day, going to feel themselves to have a special relationship, a special status should we say, because Mohammed was an Arab and the movement starts in Arabia.

But as I'm sure you know, the largest countries from the point of view of population that are Islamic are not Arabic, almost at all. Indonesia is the largest Muslim country in the world. India is the second largest Muslim country in the world even though its population is so large that Islam is a minority there. Pakistan is the third largest, I think. These all are countries without Arabs. Iran is not Arabic. It is, as we all know, an Islamic republic. The world of Arabs is very numerous, but the world of non-Arab Muslims is more so.

And it is starting to become that way in the period that we're talking about. The Arabs are simply a small number of conquerors. And particularly in Persia, where the pace of conversion is faster than that of say Egypt or Syria, there are a lot of mawali. At some point, some of the benefits of conversion, the fiscal benefits of conversion, are eliminated because the state, the Caliphate can't afford to have a population that is only paying the low religious tax. So it would seem that the moment at which you say, "OK, we're happy that you're becoming a Muslim. You're still paying land and poll taxes because we can't actually aspire to make all Muslims equal from a fiscal point of view." At that point you would have some angry malawi, at least so one would think. And so, one would think, these would be proto-Shiites or Shiite recruiting grounds.

There's a lot of debate about this. Berkey kind of skirts over this issue. Other scholars doubt that this is the case. They don't actually think there's such a close connection between the Shiite party and discontented people. Or at least there is a connection between the Shiite party and discontented people, but the discontented people are not discontent because of their tax position.

The presence of discontent within Islam is a constant. The presence of prophecy within Islam is a constant, even though the teaching of the religion has been that Mohammed is the last prophet. It's very hard to put a stop to prophecy in the Christian religion, in the Jewish religion, in the Muslim religion. Once you have started to talk about inspired religious leaders, they're going to crop up even after you've declared an end of religious charisma. And the consequences of that and the splendor, nevertheless, of the Abbasid Empire will form our subject for the next lecture.

Thanks.

Lecture 16 - The Splendor of the Abbasid Period [October 31, 2011]

Chapter 1: The Rise of the Abbasids [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: OK, in 743, civil war started within the Umayyad my family over the caliphal succession. This war broke out in Persia, which is a little unusual because until this point the subversive, discontented, proto-Shiite region had been what is called Kufa, basically southern Iraq as it now is.

It's thought that this revolt against the Umayyads had the support of the mawali. And it makes sense that if it was in Persia, the largest non-Arab Muslim country, it makes sense that you would have the most [correction: largest] concentration of non-Arab Muslims, that is to say converts or the descendants of converts, who might feel that the egalitarian promises of Islam had been betrayed and that in fact the religion was an Arab one in which non-Arabs were in a subordinate position.

The non-Arab Muslims of Persia had converted, some from Christianity, most from Zoroastrianism, a religion of central Asia. Wickham takes issue with this. If you go back to your reading, pages 292-294, he says that he doesn't think that the discontent was related to somehow the Umayyads being an excessively Arab, rather than Muslim, dynasty or that they provoked discontent among recent converts. So this is an open question. I think there's got to be some Mawali discontent, but as we've seen already there's plenty of discontent: Shiite-Sunni being the most obvious, inter-tribal, regional, problems of holding this empire together. At any rate, in 749-750, the Umayyad caliph was deposed by a member of another family known as the Abbasids.

This new caliph, Abu'l Abbas, Abbas ¨C the? Abbasids. The Abbasids were early followers of Muhammad, although not particularly heroic ones. The family had been supporters, but hadn't taken very many risks. So the Abbasids are not heroes, though they are an old family. The Abbasids came to power with support from the Shiites. This is what Wickham means by what he calls their "salvationist theology"; salvationist meaning that they were going to restore the religious fervor that the Umayyads had dissipated. So that they were originally supposed to represent a return, a reformation, of Islam to its austere roots in which the caliph was a modest, clean-living, austere figure.

They very quickly, if that was the hope of the Shiites, the Abbasids very, very quickly betrayed this. They moved their capital from Damascus, the Umayyad capital, to a new city that they constructed in the desert, Baghdad. A city built in concentric circles as a planned round fortress city, but also a commercial city and, of course, predominately city of administration. It was located thirty miles from the old Persian capital.

The Persian Empire was ruled from Ctesiphon. Relocating the capital of the caliphate to Baghdad has a number of obvious implications. While most historians would not be quite as confident as Peter Brown, whom you're reading for Wednesday is, that this represents the ¡°Persianization¡± of the caliphate, it is certainly true that moving the capital to modern Iraq, to the Mesopotamian part of the former Persian Empire, orients the caliphate further to the East. It changes the center of gravity of the caliphate from the Mediterranean, as in Damascus, basically to Persia, India, the lands between them, modern Afghanistan, Pakistan. At least those are as important, if not more so now, than the Mediterranean. Even though the empire stretches from the Indus River to the Atlantic, its center of gravity has clearly shifted.

This has implications also for culture, as we'll talk about in a moment. The accomplishment of the Abbasid caliphate in terms of culture is to bring together realms that had not been in very much contact with each other, certainly not in terms of ideas, namely India, Persia, and the Roman Empire, the former empire of the Mediterranean East. Persia stands in the middle between India and the West. To the extent that Persia is not an isolated empire of its own but a crossroads, this means that there's all this exchange of information, techniques, science, art, and culture.

But most of all, the establishment of Baghdad clearly means a different kind of rulership. One that it does not break with the Umayyads, but rather, to some extent, elaborates on it. This is an empire. It is not a kind of sacred kingdom of people living in tents. This is an empire more open to Eastern influences. That is to say somewhat more Persian in its style. Less Mediterranean and originally more Shii¡¯te.

So the significance of the Abbasid takeover is really basically twofold. One is this move east to Baghdad with all that it symbolizes that I just got through saying, the influence of non-Arab Muslims, and the creation of a complex administration, an even more complex administration than that of the Umayyads.

And then, two, it shows the influence of the Shiites. This begins as a Shi¡¯ite victory, but very quickly the Shi¡¯ites, as I said, are disillusioned, and so it also shows the limitations of the Shi¡¯ites. The Shi'ites don't just want a non-Arab dominated Islamic world, they want what we called last week a "republican administration", a non-monarchical polity. And the Abbasids are monarchical if they¡¯re anything.

Until the early tenth century, when the Abbasid caliphate starts to break up, the world of Islam was splendid, rich, cultivated, and scientifically progressive. There would be no more great conquests, particularly in the West. Already, before the Abbasids took power, we've pointed to two moments in which the Arab expansion, or the Islamic expansion, was stopped. One in 717 before the walls of Constantinople, in the failed Siege of Constantinople. Two, the battle of Poitiers, not that far from Paris in northern France, in 733. A battle at which the Merovingians, or really their high servants, the so-called Mayors of the Palace, defeated Arab raiders who then retreated basically back to Spain.

To some extent these defeats in the West were not so much defeats from the caliph's point of view as a reorientation. In 750 moving the capital to Baghdad from Damascus also means less interest in the West; less interest in trying to take over France, if that was ever a serious goal; less interest in the besieging Constantinople.

The Abbasids begin by inviting all of the Umayyad survivors to a banquet supposed to be a banquet of reconciliation. And instead they had their servitors kill all of the Umayyads at the dinner table, spread a leather cloth over them-- some of them were already dead, some of them merely wounded-- and with the leather cloth over them set the table again and banqueted on their dead and dying enemies. Satisfying, definitely.

One Umayyad escaped. Not from the banquet, but he had the foresight to say he was busy. And he escaped as far as he could go in the Muslim world, namely Spain. The last Umayyad, then, Abd al-Rahman, came to Spain and was acclaimed by the population, or got himself to be acclaimed by the population, and ruled in Spain as the first Islamic ruler to defy the caliphate. Thus the first independent Islamic kingdom, we can call it -- although they don't use that term -- the first independent Islamic kingdom, independent of the caliphate, would be Spain.

The Umayyad ruler actually recognized Baghdad. He did not proclaim himself a rival caliph. It was easy for him to recognize Baghdad 3,000 miles away, or whatever it is, they weren¡¯t going to come and get him. He took the title of emir, a ruler who is more like a title of a governor than that of a king. Nevertheless, as I said, Islamic Spain represents the first piece of the caliphal empire to break off.

When the Abbasid caliphate ran into trouble in the early 10th century, then the Umayyad ruler of Spain proclaimed himself caliph. In 929 he proclaimed himself caliph of Cordoba. Cordoba was the capital of Umayyad Spain. So at this point Spain becomes the most splendid, most cultivated part of the Islamic world. So if the period of the maximum power and splendor of the Abbasid caliphate was roughly 750-910, the period of maximum splendor of the caliphate of Cordoba in Al-Andalus, or Spain, was about 850 to its sudden collapse in 1009.

Questions? Problems? Lot of names here. We don't have a final exam, so what do you care? But I realize it is a dramatic story, but one with a large cast of characters. By now you're used to this in history. Whether these are good cat names or not, I'm not as sure as I am with the barbarians, but worth experiments.

As Wickham has described, the Abbasid caliphate was based on tax collection and administration. And your response to that may be, "Yeah, well so what?" But that's not true of all the states that we've been studying.

If you take something like Merovingian Gaul, even though in the early period they're still collecting taxes-- remember Fredegund tells Chilperic, "Let's burn these tax records and maybe our sons will be cured of their disease by God."-- but you'll have scene in Gregory of Tours, that basically the Merovingians are rich because of plunder, military expeditions, and land.

Land, above all, is the source of wealth in the kingdoms of Western Europe. Land, and the peasants to till it. Obviously it's no good if it's just empty land. Usually not, at least. It's productive land, and this is the source of wealth. Therefore the state gains its wealth on the basis of things like land, military power, and not on the basis of taxing an economy that is more sluggish, has less trade, less income than in the cities of the Muslim world.

The caliphate was a tax-paying state with a central army. Therefore the nobility, as such as it was, was not a group of local potentates, as they had been under the late Roman Empire, great landowners for example. Nor was it a military elite quasi-independent, whose loyalty to the ruler was conditional on their own interests, as we've seen with the Merovingian knights. Rather, it was a complicated administration, served as a structure of a vast empire, and the tax revenue came into the caliph, whose administration, whose civilian administration, was supreme over army, over local elites, over great landowners, at least for a time.

Chapter 2: Cultural Flowering [00:15:47]

The Abbasid Empire was the greatest state in the world at that time. Its only rival might have been T¡¯ang, China, but this is the period of the decline of that empire. Baghdad was the wealthiest and largest city in the world. Among the programs of the Abbasids, in addition to building this planned city, creating a certain kind of military structure, consolidating their conquests, among their plans was a cultural program. The cultural flowering of the Abbasid caliphate is, in part, a planned flowering. Not just a spontaneous one. The caliphs funded translations into Arabic of Greek and Persian texts dealing with science, geography, mathematics, philosophy, and medicine, in particular.

In 830, one of the caliphs established in Baghdad a kind of combination of library and research institute, called the House of Wisdom. The House of Wisdom, in the first place, paid for and sponsored translations, but it also conducted research activities. Things like an effort to measure the circumference of the earth. The kind of thing that -- you know, how do you actually do that without modern instrumentation?

A lot of the material that they translated was from Greek scientific works. Where did they get these? In some cases, they got them from Byzantium, from Constantinople itself. It's said that one treaty between Constantinople and Baghdad called for, among other things, the Byzantine emperor to lend to Baghdad a copy of Ptolemy's geography. Ptolemy, one of the great geographers of the ancient world, author of a book called The Great Geography, known in the West later on when it was translated into Latin from the Arabic as the Almagest, which is a Latin garbling of an Arab garbling of the original Greek title of the work. So this was known in the West, even when it was translated into Latin, as the Almagest. And it was just one of many works that, when they finally reached Western Europe in translations from the Arabic, kept a kind of version of their Arabic name. But the idea that, as part of a treaty, one of the things was you lend us this copy of Ptolemy so that we can translate it into Arabic, shows the commitment of the rulers to the expansion of practical knowledge.

What Islamic scholars, scientists, and policy makers were most interested in from the classical world, that is from the world of the Greek and Roman civilization, was science. Broadly speaking, science. They were less concerned with Greek plays, Greek poetry, Greek literature in general. This is partly because they had their own poetic tradition, in Arabic, and partly because their real source of inspiration for literature would be Persia. The stories, as in the Arabian Nights, and the kind of lyrical poetry of the Arabs, like love poetry, or sensuous poetry, is either home-grown or Persian.

So they translated things like Euclid on geometry, or the physician Dioscorides, who wrote, not the only, but the leading pharmaceutical manual. Pharmaceutical manual, a list of drugs, their properties, what they come from, what they can cure.

However, although they concentrated on science, they also were interested in philosophy. They were also interested in propositions, the nature of reality, metaphysics, and the major project in this realm was the translation of Aristotle. Aristotle is someone who wrote on everything: on drama, poetry, politics, metaphysics, ethics, animals, physics. And so his influence would be tremendous in all three religions that we are concerned with: Islam, Christianity, and Judaism. His influence tends to be in two related realms, or factors.

One is its comprehensiveness. They didn't translate everything of Aristotle's, but all three civilizations were aware of Aristotle as a universal thinker. That somewhere, in the work of Aristotle, there's something about everything that's worth studying. He is then, an encyclopedic thinker in a way that Plato is not. Plato is not interested in the natural world. If you go to Plato for information about animals, or plants, you're going to be out of luck because Plato despises things like that. Plato is very interested in ethics, in how to live life, in reality, in the relationship between matter and spirit, but he's not a scientist. He-- to put it mildly-- he's not interested in the material world, whereas Aristotle believes that the material world, although not necessarily the be-all and end-all of everything, is reliable. That our senses can give us decent information, that observation of the natural world leads to more than merely practical knowledge of, say, how to plow, or how to plan things, but leads to knowledge of what creation, what nature, is.

So Aristotle is encyclopedic and he's also rational. This is the second contribution that Aristotle makes. Rationality, that anything from plays to rocks can be understood in terms of logical analysis. This is fine when it comes to plays and rocks, but what about metaphysics? What about the world of religion? Aristotle has a profound influence here, again not only on Islam, but on Judaism and Christianity, because he essentially encourages a rational view of God. Now Aristotle is himself not much of a theist, that is to say, Aristotle doesn't go on about God very much, and whatever God there is in Aristotle is not a personal god to whom you would pray on the assumption, or in the belief, that he was interested in your well-being.

The closest Aristotle gets to God is the notion of a kind of Great Mechanic. The Prime Mover, as he would be called in Western philosophy. The guy who makes the mechanism, sets it going, and maybe, every so often maintains it. Maybe. A little oil here, a little bit of timing there, but he's not the God of Gregory of Tours. He's not the God who is inspiring saints to get revenge when their powers are questioned, or when somebody steals hay from them. This is not Aristotle's god. Aristotle's god is not concerned with our little petty squabbles.

It's not Muhammad's God exactly, either. It's not a god who brings a victory in battle, who's interested in a new prophecy that will seal all the previous prophets, it's a somewhat mechanistic god. It's an eigteenth-century god, even a sort of deist god, for those of you who have studied that. The notion that the world must have been created by God, because it has a lot of design in it. It works. One animal gives birth to another animal just like it, the tides go in and out, the weather is usually rational: winter is usually cold, Halloween is usually crisp. That's imposed by some kind of original order. Just like if you went and found a watch on a deserted pathway, you wouldn't assume that nature had constructed the watch, that it just was growing there the way the ferns were growing by the path. You would assume some artificer had made it. But that doesn't mean that the artificer is still alive, still interested in the watch, inclined to take care of you.

I go on this detour, or seeming detour about Aristotle, because he's important to everything in the period that we're discussing, and also in the period that is concerned for the West in the continuation of this course in History 211. There are three thinkers, just to take examples, the most famous thinkers in each of the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic traditions, who embrace Aristotle and in doing so embrace the idea of god as a rational companion to man.

?These are the Arab philosopher, known in the West as Averroes. Here again, as with Almagest, we're using his sort of Latin-garbled name. Averroes, active in Spain, 1126-1198. Maimonides, perhaps the greatest Jewish philosopher. A rabbi, a physician, a courtier, and a philosopher, also active in Spain, but also in Egypt, 1135-1204. And Thomas Aquinas, who spent most of his career teaching at the University of Paris, 1225-1274. All of these thinkers embraced Aristotle. The Latin ones, like Aquinas, via translations from the Arabic. Aristotle was known in the medieval West, not from the Greek originals, but from translations made from Arabic into Latin.

All believe that reason and faith are compatible. All based their outlook, not only on nature, but on God, on an Aristotelian form of knowledge. Interesting, in that Aristotle knew nothing about Judaism, Christianity, or Islam.

Chapter 3: Assimilation of conquered peoples and ideas [00:28:28] 

So, what is it about Aristotle, what is it about Diascordes, what is it about Ptolemy, of all of these scientists and philosophers that is of such fascination to the Islamic world? All of this emphasis that we've made on Islamic culture and its openness to other influences may seem strange to you in light of the reputation Islam has in modern America, or at least in many circles of modern America and Europe, as being obscurantist, or anti-modern, or religiously inflexible.

I teach a group of retired people where I live, just outside New York, and we're studying Islamic Spain. And they are astounded at what I've just described, at the openness of Islam to other civilizations, at its tolerance, at its curiosity about classical and Persian science. And I was surprised because this is not new information. This is not something that historians have just come up with and just discovered. If you read medieval history textbooks of a hundred years ago, it's in there. Everybody knows that Aristotle was translated from Arabic into Latin. "Everybody knows", everybody who studied the Middle Ages knows.

And I said to them, because you can't say to older people, "Oh, well you know your education is actually not very good," the way we say to you all the time. Or, "Your attention span is not very good, because all you're doing is you're plugged in to your social world". No, these people went to college in the tough old days, allegedly, and they¡¯re like, "God, I thought Islam was just this sort of frozen religion that had never changed." So you don't have that disadvantage. You don't have that idea, and so I'm not going to browbeat you with it on the basis of the experience of teaching seventy-year-olds. But there it is. I do not accept the notion, well with one exception, with one honorable exception--

Student: I'm forty-nine.

Professor Paul Freedman: Right, me too.

I don't want to go into a long discussion about, "Islam, right or wrong?" Or, "Islam, progressive or regressive?" I will say this: there are those who believe, wrongly in my opinion, that there's always been this "clash of civilization", as it's sometimes called, between the progressive Christian West and the obscurantist Islamic East. I don't accept that, in part for reasons you've just heard. There is no consistent Islamic tradition of the maintenance of dogma, or the conversion of the world by force. Insofar as that exists now, it is, in my opinion, a modern phenomenon. It is a phenomenon that results from an encounter with the West beginning around the time of Napoleon's conquest of Egypt, perhaps. It's about two centuries old.

There's another kind of belief that at some point things changed. There's a book by Bernard Lewis, the most eminent Western scholar of Islamic culture, called "What Went Wrong". And so Lewis' assumption is that the world that I'm describing, the Abbasid caliphate, is an open society and at some point and for some reasons, the Islamic world closed itself. It became less susceptible to outside influence, more suspicious of it, more dogmatic, more anti-modern, more fixated on literalism, what in the Western Christian tradition would be called fundamentalism, and on tradition.

I don't really like this either, because it sees all progress as the property of Western civilization. And it's not that I am not interested in Western civilization. I've taught it. I've taught it because I liked it. I'm not somebody who believes that it's all a tale of oppression, but I don't think that anybody who diverts from the path of Western civilization at some point is going off the cliff, or off the trail, and into the woods. There are a lot of different civilizations out there.

There's a third related idea that the Arabs are just intermediaries. Yeah, it's great, they translate Aristotle so that the real guys who can really use Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas et al. can get started. I don't accept that, either, because they do more than that. They do an awful lot of original research in medicine, in mathematics, in philosophy.

But, within all of this, to my mind, fruitless speculation, there is a kernel of what is an interesting problem. And the interesting problem is, why were the Arabs so much more successful in assimilating conquered cultures than other invaders were? Say, for example, the Germans.

You don't get this kind of efflorescence of culture under the barbarian occupants of the former Roman Empire. We're talking, not just about cultural survival, keep in mind, but about an expansion of science and allied arts.

I'd say there are maybe four factors that encouraged the Arab conquest to absorb these new influences. They're not in themselves explanations, but they are certainly background factors. The fact that the conquest was quick and relatively painless, and that it was not really a religious war. Two, and I think here very important, the elimination of frontiers. I mentioned this briefly before. You get Persian as well as Greek astronomy. From India you get things like chess, so called Arabic numerals, which actually, as we all know, come from India. These things come into the Arab and Persian worlds from India and eventually to Europe as well, in a world in which there are no frontiers between India and North Africa. They could go these thousands of miles peacefully.

The elimination of linguistic boundaries. Arabic becomes the language of learning, as much as Latin would be in the European Middle Ages, much as English has tended to become in our era. So? Maimonides, the great Jewish philosopher, wrote largely in Arabic. The Christians of Spain, so called Mozarabic Christians, studied Arabic, fought in Arabic, wrote in Arabic.

And finally, number four, the attitude of the conquerors and the conquered. The attitude of the conquerors was what Peter Brown in the reading for Wednesday will call, "a garden protected by our spears". This is a quote from one of the conquerors. The Arab conquerors considered these to be wonderful civilizations that they were not going to pillage or destroy, but rather protect. "A garden protected by our spears." But they were planning on enjoying the garden, not merely standing on the outside defending it for other people to enjoy.

The conquerors were confident in their religion, so confident that they didn't need for others to recognize it or convert. It also gave them the confidence to accept new ideas from Greek civilization, from Persian civilization, from India.

But there's also the attitude of the conquered. Brown says that, "as the storm of the Arab armies rolled over the horizon, the population of the Near East sat back to enjoy the sunshine." The Islamic conquest was of benefit, and perceived as of benefit, by most of the people who were conquered.

A kind of counterexample, in a way, explains this. In Cordoba, the capital of the Umayyad caliphate, or soon-to-be caliphate of Spain, a group of Christians around 850, were so upset at the contented attitude of the Christians of Islamic Spain-- who were, if not a majority, probably about fifty percent, close to fifty percent at this time-- these more fanatical, or at least more serious Christians, were so angry that all of their compatriots seemed to be just fine with Islamic rule that they got up in the marketplace of Cordoba and denounced Muhammad as a charlatan, as a false god, and as not a prophet. And while Islam is tolerant, that is something that you couldn't do. So they did the thing that was most defiant of the regime, really the moral equivalent of burning yourself in the marketplace, and indeed they were imprisoned, told to recant, and when they didn't recant, they were executed.

There are about fifty of these "Martyrs of Cordoba", as they're called. But they have to seek martyrdom because they have to look for it, they have to create it, because almost all the rest of their compatriots are perfectly happy to be Mozarabic Christians, practicing the freedom of their religion under a beneficent regime. Beneficent, in the eyes of these Martyr Christians, but nevertheless the regime of the devil. This shows you something about the nature of the Arab conquest and occupation.

Chapter 4: Mathematics [00:40:00]

Let me just speak briefly about a couple of aspects of what the Islamic world was interested in studying, and we may continue over into next time since the lecture on the seventh century is actually rather short. Let's start with mathematics. The great accomplishment of this time is the introduction of Arabic numbers, which if you've ever tried to multiply or divide with Roman numerals, are superior. Arabic numbers come from India, and along with this system of numerals, they imported zero-- both the number, or the non-number, and the concept. The concept of zero allows for things like decimal places, which are also developed at this time.

From India the Arabs get the kind of very basic ideas of trigonometry, the sine function. But it is their own researches, their own progress, that leads to the discovery, or development, of the five other functions. And here I'm on kind of tricky ground, because despite what they tell you about math literacy and how important it is, I haven't used this since tenth grade. But I do remember the cosine, the tangent, the cotangent, the secant, and the cosecant, right? All of these are discovered by the Arabs. They built on an edifice who's foundation is Indian mathematics.

In the early ninth century, a scholar attached to that House of Wisdom in Baghdad, named Al-Khuarizmi. In the early ninth century, Al-Khuarizmi writes a book with the title that can be translated as something like, The Book of Addition and Subtraction According to the Hindu Calculation. And this is what incorporates zero and decimal places, and interestingly enough this book is known only from its translation into Latin. The Latin version survives, whereas the original Arabic does not.

Within a century of the publication of this book, decimal fractions have been developed, square roots, the value of pi to sixteen decimal places had been calculated. Al-Khuarizm is also the author of a treatise on algebra. The word "algebra" comes from al-jabr, which is sort of restoring, restoring something that has been imbalanced and that you're now going about to balance, which of course is, in a way, the visual nature of algebra.

Al-Khuarizmi was also an astronomer. He developed star tables that allowed one to locate the planets and stars at different times of year and at different latitudes. This is what allows the making of things like astrolabes or, later, sextants. These are things that describe the sky at a particularur [correction: place]-- that allow you then to keep time; and also to navigate; to calculate time for things like prayers, or feasts, celebrations; also to cast horoscopes.

I'll work a little more with you on geography, medicine, and then summarize the Abbasids at the beginning of our next class. So I'll let you go for now. Thanks.

Lecture 17 - The Crucial Seventh Century [November 2, 2011]

Chapter 1: Geography and Medicine under the Abbasids [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: So we had talked about the mathematical researches of the Arabs combining Persian, Greek, and Indian mathematics and, of course, with contributions of their own. So that the enumeration, the use of zero are from India, but the development of algebra is a unique contribution of this period and of these people. Let's talk briefly about geography.

Remember the chapter in Wickham opens with the contemptuous description of Palermo by the tenth century geographer, Ibn Hawqal, H-A-W-Q-A-L. And the point of that is not Palermo or anything like that, but just the fascination that the Muslim world had for travel, for geography. Geography both of a quantitative kind-- measuring, navigation, figuring out to get from place to place-- and of a kind of curiosities of the world kind, of different customs, different peoples, different products.

So these geographers were employed by the caliphs, for example, to figure out the circumference of the world, to figure out the relationship between land and water in the world. This is an interesting form of speculation. If you look at Christian maps of the world up to 1300 or so, they show almost no oceans, all huge amounts of land mass. This is partly, it's thought, an interpretation of something in one of the apocryphal books of the Bible that seems to suggest that seven-eighths of the world is land.

Ptolemy, whom we spoke about last time, the Greek geographer, author of this book known as the Almagest or Geography, translated into Arabic as one of the first projects of this House of Wisdom in Baghdad. Ptolemy has a different picture. And Ptolemy is the first geographer received in the medieval period to suggest that there's an awful lot of water. And that you could get around much of the world by water.

Although crucially, Ptolemy does not think that you can go around Africa. Ptolemy has a kind of Antarctic land mass that connects with Africa. And it was only the Portuguese at the end of the fifteenth century-- specifically in 1498, well really, 1489-- who demonstrated that you could go around Africa, and thus from the Atlantic Ocean into the Indian Ocean. Crucial, crucial discovery.

But this question of how much water is there versus how much land is there-- a sense of the entire world-- is a problem investigated by these geographers. Many of these guys are indefatigable travelers. So there's this book by Al-Muqaddasi, M-U-Q-A-D-D, usually known in English as the Best Division for Knowledge of the Regions. Completed in 985 after twenty years of traveling.

But the greatest traveler of the Islamic premodern world was Ibn Khaldun, who is much later but worth at least mentioning here, 1332 to 1406. And he started from his native Tunis and traveled as far as China and Indonesia.

And then, finally, a scholar named al-Idrisi, another one of these travelers, geographers, was hired by the Christian king of Sicily, Roger the Second, in 1138 to put together a map of the world with accompanying descriptive texts. And it is an aspect both of the respect accorded to the Arab geographers in the Christian world, and the fact that despite our tendency to see these two worlds as opposed-- after all 1138 is the era of the Crusades-- there's quite a fair amount of collaboration, interchange of knowledge between the Christian kingdoms of Europe, and the Islamic world-- the Islamic kingdoms-- of the Southern Mediterranean and the Middle East.

Finally, medicine. We're not exhausting the subject studied by the Arabs, but I wanted to give you math, geography, and medicine as three examples. The main authority for the Arabs, the person that they translated with the most assiduity and interest, was Galen, G-A-L-E-N, a physician who wrote in Greek at the time of the Roman Empire. And Galen is the person who is responsible for the transmission, if not invention, of the notion of the four bodily humors. This model of physiology dominated medicine until the eighteenth century, let's say.

This is the notion that within human beings there are these four fluids that are essential building blocks of character and of health. They are both mental and physical factors in health or in illness. And they correspond both to the four elements-- the four basic things out of which the world is built according to Greek science-- and to the interaction of the corresponding four climates or four tendencies.

So the four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. These climates or tendencies are hot, dry, moist-- hot, dry, moist, cold-- right. Hot, cold, moist, dry. And the four humors-- these are liquids that are inside our bodies-- are bile or yellow bile, which corresponds to fire, which is hot and dry. Blood, which corresponds to the element of air, and is hot and wet. Phlegm, mucus, P-H-L-E-G-M, which corresponds to water, and is cold and wet. And, finally, black bile, which is earth, and cold and dry.

Key to this idea of the humors is the notion of balance or equilibrium. And in this it resembles Chinese medicine, Indian Ayurvedic medicine, and indeed, at least conceptually, notions that people have of their own bodies. That the experience of illness or of mental distress is one of imbalance, of the predominance of one element over another.

So the healthy body is in a state of equilibrium, while disease is part of a fluctuation due to imbalance. But people are never completely balanced, at least not for long. Everybody has some, what's called temperament. A "temperament" is a favoring of one of these humors. So and we still use these terms without particularly being interested in their origins. So melancholia, or the melancholic temperament, which is associated with sadness, lethargy, what would be medicalized now as depression, is from a predominance of black bile. Melan-- black. Cholar-- bile. In Greek, melancholia.

There's the choleric temperament, people who tend to be angry, irritable. And this is from regular or yellow bile, predominance of that. Or sanguine: sort of more optimistic, more risk taking. Predominance of blood, the sanguinary humor.

This is the basis of an awful lot of medical theory of physiology, of understanding of disease and its treatment, as well as its prevention through things like diet. There are lots and lots of medical writings and doctors in the Islamic world. The most famous is known in the West as Avicenna, Ibn Sina, 980 to 1037. He is a Persian, active in Persia.

And he, like many of these doctors, was not just a physician, but a musicologist and a philosopher. He wrote medical writings on physiology, diagnosis, treatment, and medication. His work was translated into Latin and known in the West as the Canon. The Canon of Avicenna was the standard work taught in medical schools until the seventeenth, eighteenth century.

Again, I wouldn't say that I would be desperate to be alive in the eleventh century in order to have better medical care. There is no-- the humors don't really work; it's not scientifically true, but so what? We are interested in the world views in aspects of how people look at things. Certainly, many aspects of this medical care were superior to what was available elsewhere. It was based on observation. The observation obviously couldn't be MRIs or CAT scans. The observation, however, was much closer than that even undertaken by the Greeks.

An awful lot of what might be learned of disease was through urine. And the examination of the urine is almost somewhat the symbol of being a doctor, that in some Western illustrations of medicine you know that the person is a doctor because he's holding up this little flask and examining its properties.

So, again, you weren't supposed to-- in some societies-- cut up bodies for autopsies. We all know things like the circulation of the blood, the role the heart in that were not properly understood for many centuries later. But this is the most elaborate and successful model of medicine and practice of medicine in the civilized world at this time.

Chapter 2: The Collapse of the Abbasid Caliphate [00:15:05]

So this is a splendid civilization. I hope I've given you some slight indication of that. Why does it collapse? This is partly a question of why does any civilization collapse. Time tends to ruin everything. The Abbasids were victims of the same divisive tendencies we've already seen at work within the Islamic world right from the beginning.

Religious strife, particularly but not exclusively the Sunni/Shi¡¯ite division. Dynastic, that is to say, internal or familial problems. Resentment at taxation. In the beginning, as we said, the Islamic conquerors taxed rather lightly. But as the ability to rely on confiscated estates of nobles, the Church and the state faded as the Abbasids became the state.

Like all states, they started to run out of money. They had a large army, they had a large court, they had a large administrative structure to maintain. And then, as now, people tend, rightly or wrongly, not to appreciate the role of government in everything, and to be resentful of having to pay for it.

The fundamental problem, as Wickham points out, is that the Empire was too big. And here, we're back where we started with the Roman Empire. Empires tend to fall because they are too big. And being too big they tend to overreach. In other words, they're already big and they try, if not to get bigger, at least to deal with more enemies. Because as you get bigger you develop more enemies. And as you get bigger you also develop more fears of external enemies.

So to say that the Empire was too big is not to say anything very innovative or unusual. The real question is why does there come a point at which this bigness is fatal? In other words, the Abbasid Caliphate does fine from 750 to 910 and then it falls apart. Why does it fall apart when it does? And I don't have a great answer for that, except to point to the other divisions, or to misfortune: having poor Caliphs, having Caliphs who don't last for a long time and are overthrown.

Nevertheless, states start to split off from the Caliphate. The first, right from the beginning, is Umayyad Spain. And Wickham talks a little bit about the civilization of Umayyad Spain. But you start to have the splitting of places like Egypt, under the Shi¡¯ite Dynasty the Fatimids by the tenth century.

What's interesting is that these societies are run very much like the Abbasid Caliphate. Although they are large, they are more practical, compact, and somewhat easier to hold together. They have the same kind of cultural efflorescence, scientific curiosity, sensuality of culture, luxury products. Indeed, Umayyad Spain would have the reputation of the height of civilization in Christian Europe of the tenth century.

A nun writing from a German monastery in the tenth century named Hroswitha, Hroswitha of Gandersheim, describes C¨®rdoba, capital of Umayyad Spain, the largest city in Europe-- excluding Constantinople, the largest city in Western Europe at this time-- she describes C¨®rdoba as "the ornament of the world". She had never visited it. She's a cloistered nun in a monastery in Germany. Nevertheless, for her this is the most splendid place in the world. Splendid in terms of wealth, population, culture, learning.

And Ornament of the World is the title of a book by our colleague in the Spanish department, Mar¨ªa Menocal, written about ten years ago, describing medieval Spain and its civilization. Cordoba would be a center for learning among Christians, Jews, and Muslims.

So this series of cultural accomplishments by the Arabs, as I said, may come as a surprise, but it should not be. The surprise element may be, as we've said now more than once, the ability of the Arabs to assimilate other traditions and to remain as conquerors. That is, these two things are related. They remain as conquerors even though the Caliphate does not survive. The Arabs are still the dominant force in Egypt, North Africa, and much of the Middle East. And where they are not dominant, Islam remains the dominant faith of places like Persia, modern Iran, and further east.

So just because the Caliphate falls does not mean that Islam loses power and it doesn't mean that the civilization of Islam fails. At least, not at this point. I hope then we can see that Islam is a thing in itself, a historical force in itself, developed in our period, but also to some extent an heir to the Roman Empire. Remember I said that there are three heirs to the Roman Empire-- the Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire, most obviously the Western kingdoms-- and when we come to Charlemagne next week we'll be talking about this much more aggressively-- and the Islamic world.

It's also, however, the heir to some other cultures. It's the heir to Sassanian or Persian culture, for example. So it is not exclusively to be understood as a successor to the Roman Empire, but then again, neither is the west of Europe and there is Byzantium. And those are the things that we're going to be discussing in the future.

So any observations thus far, or problems thus far? The Islamic world, these three lectures clear as can be? Imprinted in your mind like the Seal of the Prophets? OK.

Chapter 3: The Importance of the Seventh Century [00:22:49]

So what about the seventh century? Now we're backtracking a little. Because with the Abbasids we'd gotten up as far as the tenth century. I want to go back to the seventh century because it's the crucial turning point of the early Middle Ages. Even though we're in the tenth week of this course-- is that right?-- here we are at its hinge, I think. Or at least we can get the lay of the land.

This is a little bit like approaching a shoreline which you see very vaguely, and then suddenly actually you can start to see the houses and see which are the mountains that are far way, and which are the hills that are in the harbor, and so forth and so on. So I hope that-- I mean, the course differs from many other history courses in that beyond just the fall of the Roman Empire, you don't have an instinctive feel for what this course is about, what its contours are. So what I'm trying to do is not just point to a turning in the road, but I'm trying to show you the road itself through the proverbial forest and the trees. OK?

Partly what we're concerned with is periodization. Now what are the time periods? Is the classical world and then the medieval world? Is it something called the classical world on intermediate period called Late Antiquity and then the Middle Ages? What does the course title, "The Early Middle Ages", mean when its successor is called "The Birth of Europe"? We're going to change that, by the way, maybe we're going to combine these into one course called the Middle Ages, but that's for the future.

So periodization. And then when are we talking about as the borders of these periods? It's a murky period that covered by this course, roughly 284 to 1000 or Diocletian to the year 1000. Murky but important, as I hope you see already. The development of such absolutely fundamental world historic things as state-sponsored Christianity, Islam, the ideas of political power in Europe as nations as opposed to the universal Roman Empire. All of these things take shape in our period.

The traditional periodization concentrated on the fall of the Roman Empire. And while everybody admitted this was somewhat of an arbitrary date, and indeed its origins and consequences in Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire extend to the second century AD and go on to the fall of Constantinople in the fifteenth century, nevertheless, 476, the deposition of the last Roman emperor ruling from Ravenna by the barbarian chieftain Odoacer, who then proclaims Italy to be part of the Eastern Roman Empire, or at least loyal to the Eastern Roman Empire, that loyalty largely a fiction.

In the traditional periodization 476 is then followed by something called the Dark Ages. And the Dark Ages end, depending on your point of view, with the growth of the European economy in the tenth or eleventh century, with the rediscovery of Latin classical culture in the twelfth century, or with the Italian Renaissance in the fifteenth century.

Certainly, the Renaissance artists regarded everything that came before them as the Dark Ages. And it is they who call medieval architecture "Gothic¡±, by which they don't mean a complimentary term. Because if there's one thing the Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris is not, it's not Gothic in the literal sense. It has nothing to do with the Visigoths or the Ostrogoths. We have a few little remnants of Visigothic and Ostrogothic architecture, and it's not like that at all.

But for Vasari and people like this-- Italian Renaissance writers-- all this was just junk. It was just junk of the past. It's just the Dark Ages. The sun rose in Florence sometime after Dante, is what most people continue to believe.

And as a medievalist I long ago gave up fighting this and embraced it. The Dark Ages are cool. I know Halloween is over but, nevertheless, we all know that the Middle Ages is far more fun than the Renaissance. Who wants proportion and logic and severe classical lines, when you can have gargoyles and weird stuff? I'm preaching to the converted, right? You're in this class. If you didn't like weirdness, you'd be taking¡ªwell, what would you be taking? I think I'll just leave that. We're not in competition in this department.

So I'm trying to argue that this period is more than just a long nap for people just waiting for something like the Italian Renaissance. There is this book that is on the cutting edge of scholarship of this period that is called The Long Morning of the Early Middle Ages, which I think is not a felicitous title, much as I admire the people who put this together who are at another university not all that different from this one. By "long morning" they don't mean brunch.

That's what I would have called it, The Long Brunch of the Early Middle Ages. People enjoying eggs Benedict on the smoldering ruins of the Roman Empire-- eggs Benedict, right? The Benedictine Rule. [LAUGHTER] OK. OK.

So we've seen that 476 is not a cataclysmic turning point. OK. It's not a cataclysmic turning point because, first of all, the Roman Empire survives in the East as we've said. [LAUGHTER] So I think we should turn this off for just a minute or two if you don't mind.

Chapter 4: The Seventh Century as a Turning Point [00:30:18]

Why the seventh century, seriously? It is a better claim to the status as pivot for this roughly 700 year period than 476. It is in some sense the end of the classical world. It is in some sense the end of whatever we want to call this, Late Antiquity. This is for basically four reasons.

One, and the most obvious, is the rise of Islam. The rise of Islam and its consequences. The breaking apart of the Mediterranean into different regions. Although I've stressed the ties between Islam, Greece, Persia, between the northern and the southern Mediterranean, between Islamic Spain and Christian Spain, nevertheless, the conquest of the Arabs in the seventh century and the early eighth century create somewhat of a break up of what had been a united Mediterranean under the Romans. They're different religious, cultural, and trades zones.

Under the Romans, North Africa and Italy had been really very close together. Had much more in common with each other than say Italy and Northern Gaul or Britain. Augustine sails between North Africa and Italy all the time. They're quite close. But we think of them as being far away because in the modern world, and indeed since the Islamic conquests, they've been culturally and economically very different.

So this breaking up of the Mediterranean creates-- and I'll elaborate on this in a moment-- doesn't create the birth of Europe exactly, but it creates Europe as a kind of separate region. Naturally, from the geographical point of view, Europe has always existed as a continent. But here we have the beginning of the distinction between Europe and Asia and Africa without the kinds of close ties that we've seen connected the Mediterranean, the two shores of the Mediterranean, which mainly because they're different continents and, indeed, the third shore of the Mediterranean in the East, technically in Asia. Now these start to fall into different cultural and political realms.

So the first aspect of the seventh century is this breakup of Mediterranean unity, the breakup of this aspect of the Roman legacy. And if I've emphasized that there are three heirs to the Roman Empire, the fact that there are three heirs to one fortune shows that they are distinct.

Second, and related to this, the rise of Northern Europe. What had been peripheral in the Roman Empire starts to become much more central. And when we come to Charlemagne you'll see this. Around 800-- well, 800 exactly-- is the year in which Charlemagne is crowned Roman emperor in Rome itself by the Pope as it turns out. But already, this importance of Northern Europe is evident in some things we've been talking about.

The Irish missionaries, for example. The role of Ireland in preserving knowledge and in diffusing Christianity. The role of Britain. The fact that, as I said, Britain at the time of Bede, was the most cultivated heir to the Latin learning of the Roman Empire. And the fact that this should be true in the eighth century shows some kind of difference, some kind of change, since in the Roman Empire these had been peripheral areas. The further north you went, the further away from the Mediterranean, the less civilized the society was.

The third aspect of this turning point, a third way in which we have a kind of shift, is the crisis and reshaping of the Byzantine Empire. The loss of Egypt to North Africa, Palestine, and Syria, which take place in the seventh century. And we'll talk about this more next week. But the decline of the cities of the Byzantine Empire, the militarization of society in the Byzantine Empire.

In fact, the seventh century is the era of the Byzantine Empire that most resembles the fifth century for the Western Roman Empire. If we preserve the term "Dark Ages" reluctantly, the West goes into a period of what Wickham calls "radical simplification of material culture." That is to say people become poorer and less in contact with the wider world. And this happens in Byzantium in the seventh century.

So it's not that the Eastern empire survives completely intact, but that its collapse is later than that of the Western empire. But crucially, again as we will see, that collapse is not total. It's not as complete as that of the West. The Byzantine Empire would just barely survive the seventh and eighth centuries, and by the ninth century enter into a period of efflorescence that we will be describing.

But this society is not really Roman anymore on some fundamental level-- fundamental level including control of Rome and Italy. The basis of the Byzantine Empire will be Anatolia, that is Asiatic Turkey and the Balkans, modern Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, Albania, Croatia, Serbia, and so forth.

Constans II, Byzantine emperor from 652 to 668, leaves Constantinople after the first Muslim siege intent on creating a new capital in the West because Constantinople is too vulnerable. In other words, he envisages a Eastern Roman Empire, but with its capital in Sicily. He moves his capital eventually to Syracuse, Siracusa in modern Sicily. He's the last emperor to visit Rome. Well, the last eastern Roman emperor actually to put in an appearance in Rome.

As I've said, these emperors would call themselves the Roman emperor until the day the Turks penetrated the walls of Constantinople in 1453. But they weren't really emperors of Rome in the sense of control over the city of Rome after 664, the last visit of an emperor to Rome. And then four years later he was murdered in Syracuse.

Well, the fact that the emperor is murdered is not all that unusual. A lot of these emperors get murdered, get their noses cut off in lieu of murder. The notion being that if you're mutilated you can't be an emperor again. And then one of these emperors¡ªas we¡¯ll-- again, we'll discuss this-- comes back even though his nose is gone.

But what this means is the end of this experiment in moving the seat of the Empire. It moves back to Constantinople. And Constantinople, for better or worse-- and surprisingly, a lot for better-- remains the capital of this powerful, if limited, empire.

The seventh century, however, should not be seen as a time when these realms are completely isolated from each other. The Islamic, the Eastern, the Western. It is still possible to travel. And, indeed, Brown emphasizes this. The archbishop of Canterbury in the end of the seventh century, Theodore, came from Tarsus in Anatolia, Syria. Many of the popes of this era were of Syriac or Greek origin.

This starts to fade, however, as Islam takes control over more and more of the former Eastern Roman Empire. So not only do you get a diminution in communication and cultural exchange between the Islamic world now as it is and the Christian world, you get less between East and West. In the West people no longer tend to know Greek outside of Rome and the papacy. And by the eighth century, even in Rome, this knowledge is much, much diminished.

And then the reorientation of Persia. It's no accident that Brown begins the chapter that you've read with a discussion of Persia. And, actually, we hear more about Persia now in this reading than in any other single reading for the course. And this is not just because of the Islamic conquest. Part of it is Persia's, modern Iran's position. It's modern Iran, but it's also modern Iraq. The capital of Persia is in what is now Iraq, in the more fertile part of the former Persian empire, that is to say the West, what is known in the ancient world as Mesopotamia.

So Persia could be oriented towards Mesopotamia or could be oriented more towards the East, towards India ultimately. And this is partly for extraneous reasons. The rise of these people called the White Huns who press Persia from the East and take over modern Afghanistan and even what's now Eastern Iran.

Persia has been a kind of off stage presence in this course. But in terms of trade, there had been a great deal of interaction. Trade and culture. The Silk Road. Traffic in spices. There have been a tremendous traffic in religious ideas, as well. Nestorianism becomes strong in Persia, the heresy of the fifth century. Manicheanism, which we discussed in relation to Augustine comes from Persia. A lot of apocalyptic thinking in both Islam and in Christianity. The focus on the end of the world and what God has planned for sinners and for the justified, comes from Persia, as well.

Now, however, in the seventh century and the eighth century start to see a hardening of the boundaries. Western Europe is less in contact with the East. It's less in contact with Byzantium, with which it has religious disputes. And it is out of contact with these influences coming from the East from as far as Persia, that characterized the period that we began with and up to now.

And this is reflected in the changing of the center of gravity of the Caliphate that we alluded to last time. The move from Damascus to Baghdad is not only a strategic decision or a cultural decision, but it's a de-Mediterraneanizing of Islam. Its capital is now within the former Persian Empire. And if it doesn't mean a Persianization of the Caliphate, it certainly means that Islam is not really a Mediterranean religion and certainly not exclusively.

And then, finally, in the West the seventh century sees the end of a secular elite. When we began this course we talked about the Roman Empire as characterized by a civilian or senatorial elite of wealthy people of cultivation, who are not only literate but who are scholarly and artistically inclined. These people are gone by the seventh century. In their place is a smaller and somewhat different elite, at least elite understood by learning, of clergy. It's at this point that monasteries and churches become the repository of the classical legacy and are run by the almost sole literate people in society.

Chapter 5: Pirenne Thesis and Conclusion [00:44:30]

So, how do we put these things together, these phenomena together? One way of doing this that was very popular in the mid-twentieth century was what was known as the "Pirenne thesis", named after the great Belgian historian Henri Pirenne, who was active in the teens, twenties of the twentieth century. Henri Pirenne, the Pirenne thesis. And the Pirenne thesis goes like this:

The Roman Empire did not fall in 476. It continued, if not as a political entity, as a sociocultural and most especially, economic entity. Because the Mediterranean and Mediterranean unity were what characterized the Roman Empire from the start, and this was not disrupted by the barbarians. Mediterranean trade continued to exist. Gold coinage continued to exist.

What ended them was not the collapse of the Empire in the West, but Islam. That the Arab invasions cut off the different pieces of the Mediterranean and ended Mediterranean trade. And with the end of the Mediterranean as this key entrep?t, or economic heartland, new centers were created, particularly Northern Europe.

The rise of Northern Europe that I mentioned here was most obvious in the ascent of Charlemagne. Charlemagne, crowned emperor in Rome in 800, was by no means from Rome or Italy, but was from the Frankish realm. The lands of his family were in what is now Belgium, Western Germany, the Netherlands, and Northeastern France. His capital was not Rome. He went there to be crowned. His capital was rather in Aachen, a city that is in Germany but only barely. It's very close to the Dutch border. Very close to Belgium, as well. Very close to Luxembourg. And quite close to France.

He is a representative then of Northern Europe. Aachen had been known to the Romans because it has hot baths, and that's why Charlemagne chose it also: natural hot springs. But it is not part of the olive oil and wine-growing regions of the Mediterranean that we saw were what the Romans loved, and what they considered to be civilization.

For Pirenne then, the rise of Charlemagne is made possible by Mohammed. And, indeed, his master work was called Mohammed and Charlemagne. Here, the periodization is definitely Islam. Islam creates Europe because Europe is the antithesis to the world created by Islam. Pirenne had no ideological opposition to Islam. For him Islam is simply a facilitating factor in destroying the ancient world. And by ancient world, he means the Mediterranean.

Well, this is one of those elegant theories that has been disproven. It's been disproven largely by archaeology, which has shown that there's lots of trade in the Mediterranean. That the arrival of Islam by no means disrupted trade, by no means disrupted these contacts.

But it is true-- and I've just said or emphasized-- that beginning with Islam, beginning with the seventh century, there is a drifting apart of cultural and political realms. We can start to identify three different civilizations.

And next week we're going to talk about the flowering of Byzantium, that is the height of this Eastern Roman Empire in terms of its political military power. And then we're going to come to Charlemagne and try to see what this landscape of the development of something other than mere barbarian post-Roman successor states means for the West. OK. It's been a lot of fun. Thanks.

Lecture 18 - The Splendor of Byzantium [November 7, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Profesor Paul Freedman: So I hope you're ready for the Byzantine Empire. I hope you weren't too bewildered by all the names, peoples, battles, geography of the reading. It just goes on and on, doesn't it? We, in the midst of the laughs, attempted to look at the seventh century last time as a turning point in the history of the period that we're dealing with, the post-Roman world, the early Middle Ages. Certainly among the major shifts was the rise of Islam and the consequent radical changes in the Mediterranean territories, particularly, of course, the areas conquered from the Eastern Roman Empire by Byzantium [correction: the Caliphate], namely Syria, Palestine, Egypt, and eventually North Africa. The seventh century, therefore, changed the shape of the Byzantine Empire, and so its orientation as well as culture.

Here I have a kind of periodization. We've spoken about Justinian's expansion. Very shortly after his death, there begins what seems in retrospect, at least in part, to be a reaction to imperial overreach. Imperial overreach is a phenomenon seen throughout history, described most memorably, perhaps, by our own Paul Kennedy, the tendency for empires simply, in order to protect themselves or in order to fulfill their ambitions to get too large for their own ability to hold onto their possessions. This is an economic problem, a logistical problem, a resource problem, and even a cultural problem.

In general, it's hard to say what provokes the crisis. That is, with the Roman Empire as with the Abbasids, we can say, "Oh, well it was too big". On the other hand, it was too big and did just fine for centuries. In the case of the Abbasid Empire, maybe not centuries, but 150 years, which as these things go is a pretty long time. Here, however, we're talking about something that is much more obviously related to some kind of overreach. Justinian formed his expanded empire, which is the first map in the handout. And merely a few years after his death, it started to unravel.

You'll recall that we said that he had at great cost conquered Italy. After the easy conquest of North Africa, this looked like it would be easy as well. But in fact, while North Africa, occupied by the Vandals, fell within a year or two, Italy took twenty years to wrest from the Ostrogoths. And the peninsula was devastated and in radical economic decline when Byzantium took over.

A mere three years after Justinian's death in 568, Italy was invaded by yet another barbarian tribe, the Lombards. The Lombards did not take over all of it. The Byzantine Empire-- Eastern Roman Empire-- managed to hold on to Sicily, much of southern Italy, the east coast, particularly the capital of the Byzantine province, Ravenna. But nevertheless, the Lombards occupied most of the peninsula.

And as we'll discuss in a moment, other disasters piled up in this period that I have just called "Contraction". But it's not just a question of the Empire getting smaller. It's really a radical crisis and an ongoing crisis with the appearance of many enemies and the radical shrinking of the borders of this empire.

So again, look at the empire in 565. It's making a good attempt at Justinian's death to mimic the Roman Empire at the beginning of our course, at its height in the third century. It doesn't have northwestern Europe, but it has most of the Mediterranean. And to the degree that the Roman Empire was, as we with fatiguing repetition have said, a Mediterranean-centered empire, this empire of Justinian's does a good job of restoring that Mediterranean orientation.

If you look at the second map during this period of what the author of this book that I took the map from, Haldon, H-A-L-D-O-N, calls "the process of devastation", you can see how much has been lost. The Empire at this point consists mostly of Anatolia, a little bit of Italy, a few islands. Even the Balkans is mostly occupied by Slavs and Bulgars.

There then follows a period of reconstruction, of the stabilization of borders, of taking back some lands in the Balkans and in Anatolia from the Arabs in Anatolia and from various groups in the Balkans. This is also the period of the iconoclastic emperors. And then finally, an expansion of the Byzantine Empire. The golden age of the Byzantine Empire is this period after the settlement of Iconoclasm in 843, until the appearance of a new enemy, the Seljuk Turks, who won a devastating victory in 1071 and begin a process of what ultimately¡ªbut, in this case, ultimately means 350 years-- what ultimately would be the final crisis for the Byzantine Empire, which would be extinguished by the Turks in 1453.

So if you look at map number three, the Byzantine Empire around the year 1000-- Ignore Bulgaria for the time being; that is a separate kingdom, and we're going to talk about it soon. This is a compact empire compared to that of Justinian. It is not in control of the Mediterranean. It has two bases, really, the Balkans and Asia Minor. And it has a little bit of territory in Italy still.

But this empire made logistic sense, was never easy to keep together. Nevertheless, it was stable, had enough money for its substantial military expenses, and even to create a kind of cultural efflorescence.

Chapter 2: The Contraction of the Byzantine Empire [00:07:31]

So here we have a story not merely of survival, but of survival, adaptation, and expansion. And that's what I want to discuss with you today. The reason we're doing this is because this is part of early medieval history. We've talked about the legacy of the Roman Empire, a three-part kind of legacy in our formulation. On Wednesday, we'll start talking again about Europe, northern Europe and the degree to which Charlemagne in particular it is a self-conscious heir to the Roman Empire. He revised the title of Roman Emperor.

In the case of the East, these people have never abandoned the title of Roman Emperor. And indeed, the key thing about the Byzantine crisis in contrast to the crisis of the West is that the Empire never falls. It is never destroyed. But it does undergo many of the same crises and consequences of the crises that the West did in the fifth century.

I said last time that to some extent, while we don't like the term "Dark Ages", certainly after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century, Europe enters into a period of radical material simplification: That is to say, it is more rural. There's less commerce. It is politically more decentralized. It is militarized. And its culture is the preserve of a relatively small group of clergy.

A lot of the same things happen in the Byzantine Empire in the seventh and eighth centuries. This is a kind of dark age for Byzantium. We don't have a lot of written sources, for example. There seems to be an almost complete desertion of the ancient cities, with the exception of Constantinople itself and one or two others, the same kind of ruralization of society.

It is a militarized society, although as we'll see, with more central governmental role. But it is a society built around warfare. And it is a society in which culture is also somewhat restricted. The libraries don't get destroyed exactly, but they certainly don't get a whole lot of use, at least in terms of things that we can understand or follow.

And the Byzantine Empire faced an awful lot of enemies.

The history of Byzantium is to some extent the history of emperors you've never heard of, writers you've never heard of, a lot of really neat art, heresies that you may have never heard of before but you have to learn anyway, and invaders, some of whom you've heard of, some of whom not. But heresies and invaders are really the story.

I didn't make this history, but it is very important. And actually, I think heresies are kind of neat, although who am I to say since I went into this for a living? So I must've liked them. The most dramatic enemy of Byzantium in this period is Caliphate, the Arab empire of Islam. And so in terms of the shocks and crises of this period of contraction after Justinian, the rise of Islam, and in particular the two dramatic sieges of Constantinople in 674, where a naval battle finally defeated the Arab forces, and the siege of 717. So 674, 717, two sieges of Constantinople by the Caliphate.

So what was the problem of imperial overreach-- just to take this back to its origins? Justinian in particular, as we said, was focused on the conquest of the Western Roman Empire, which he saw, of course, not as a conquest but as a reconquest, a restoration of territories taken unjustly by barbarian rulers, which he was determined to take back. He already had one enemy, however, and that was Persia on the eastern front. This is nothing new. We started the course with the Rhine and Danube frontier as one front and the Persian frontier in the East as another. The only difference is now the Rhine and Danube frontier has been breached.

Justinian pacified the Persians, paid them off, made a treaty with them in order to have a free hand to undertake the conquests in the West. In retrospect, with the historian's ability to quarterback after the game, the lack of attention to Persia was a mistake. The Persians in fact invaded despite this peace treaty in the 540s. The Italian campaign didn't go well. Things were patched up. Justinian died in peace. But his empire was quite fragile.

In addition to everything else, there's a plague in 541-542 that kills a very large proportion of the population. And as I said, after Justinian's death in 568, the Lombards invade Italy.

And beginning just a few years later, in the 570s, we start to have another force that's a little more difficult to describe. Just in the manner of the convenient term "Lombards" we don't really know what "Lombards" means. We don't really know who these people are. I mean, we know a bit about them. But it's a pseudo-ethnic name. We don't really know how people identified themselves. But it becomes even more confusing with the groups that invaded the Balkans.

The conventional way of describing these is that the leaders were a group called the "Avars" and their subordinates, their sort of cast of thousands, their slave armies, whatever you want to call them, were "Slavs". The Avars are a Turkic or Mongol people. The Slavs are Indo-European Slavs.

This is to some extent how the Slavs get into the Balkans. How this worked, relations between the Slavs and the Avars, is not completely clear. But we certainly know that they took over much of the Balkans, including Greece. Greece in this case has to be considered part of the Balkans. So the southeastern corner of Europe, modern Greece, Bulgaria, European Turkey, Albania, Croatia, Serbia, Kosovo, Bosnia, Herzegovina, all of these countries are a heartland of the Byzantine Empire in its post-Justinianic form, but now invaded by Avars and Slavs beginning in 570.

The emperor Maurice was murdered by his troops in 602, campaigning in the Balkans against the Avars and the Slavs. He was succeeded by a cruel but hapless general named Phocas, whose disastrous rule as emperor involved not only the uprising or invasion of Avars and Slavs in the Balkans, but a Persian invasion in the East. Phocas was overthrown in 610.

The Persians, Avars, and Slavs allied against Constantinople. And in 626, the city was besieged from both sides. The Persians camped out across the Bosphorus in the end of Asiatic Turkey. And the Avars and the Slavs camped out outside the great Theodosian Walls of the city that were on its land side, its western side.

The fact that the city managed to overcome this was attributed to various miracles of saints, and particularly the protection of the Virgin Mary. And it's very important in terms of the later history of iconoclasm to point out that they had icons and all sorts of wonder-working portrayals of powerful saints on the walls in order to protect the city. And it worked-- or at least certainly it looked like it worked. The invasions were foiled.

How did the Byzantine Empire fight? How did manage to withstand these invasions? Very briefly, one factor is the strategic position of Constantinople, a city extremely difficult to take by force. Indeed, it would not be taken by a flat-out assault until 1204, when Western crusaders, an alliance of the Venetians and the Franks, as they're called-- basically various Western European groups-- took Constantinople. How they took Constantinople; why they didn't go to Jerusalem, which was the original plan; how they took a Christian city instead of the Muslim-held city of Jerusalem is a topic for the next semester. But that is the first time that the walls were breached by force.

There are very successful sneak attacks. So for example, in our period, the emperor Justinian II had been deposed and had his nose and tongue slit. This form of mutilation was to prevent him from coming back again. It was considered more humane to mutilate someone than to kill them, but the mutilation was considered to be disabling. You can't have an emperor whose nose is basically gone.

But they were wrong about him. In fact, he came back with a force of people from-- if you look at that third map-- Cherson, the Crimean peninsula that's sticking out into the Black Sea. They besieged the city, and he and some followers snuck in at a point where one of the aqueducts met the wall. There was a little sort of space to sneak in. And they managed to, by a surprise attack and by acclamation of the noseless Emperor Justinian, win the city for themselves. So this is an example of a successful siege, but not a flat-out open assault.

Justinian had a reign of terror for another six or seven years after 705, the date of the siege. He was a very angry man. And he got his revenge on as many people as possible, including people who had nothing to do with his mutilation. And he was eventually killed. An awful lot of these emperors died violent deaths. They're tough guys, but it's a fairly tough time.

So Persian/Avar/Slav siege of 626, the seeming victory of Heraclius over these forces, and then its virtual undoing by the Islamic conquests of much of the Byzantine Empire. Remember, the conquest of Syria in the 630s, the capitulation of Alexandria in 642? We looked at all of these from the Muslim side very recently.

Meanwhile, while Byzantine was busy losing much of its empire in the East, the Slavs were permanently settling in the Balkans and in Greece. And they were now joined by another invading people, the Bulgars. The Bulgars-- that is, the people who live in Bulgaria now-- are a Slavic people. But the original Bulgars were a more Turkic people who formed a kind of what was called khanate-- that is, a state ruled by a military leader, a khan.

But here again, who are the Bulgars ethnically? How many of them have Slavic followers? It's both very controversial-- that is, the modern Bulgarians hate the notion of being thought of as ancestrally Turks, so what I'm saying is heresy in some quarters. But these ethnic designations are not as meaningful, or at least as stable, as we often tend to think they are.

The Bulgars would intermarry with the Slavs. And they would eventually convert to Orthodoxy. But they would be a problem for Byzantium from about 700 until just after 1000.

Chapter 3: Reconstruction of the Empire [00:21:49]

So how was this empire rebuilt? It was rebuilt on the basis of control over the Balkans and Anatolia. It was also rebuilt on the basis of reorganization of the army. Obviously, the position of Constantinople and its walls is not enough to assure victory in battle once you get away from Constantinople. There's certain kinds of weapons that they had. There's this mysterious one that I mentioned before called "Greek fire", which is certainly part of the victory of 674, the naval battle against the Caliphs. It's a some sort of burning substance that explodes on impact and is useful to burn ships.

But the army is reorganized. And this is one of the key aspects of this period of contraction and of reconstruction, of crisis and of recovery. And we'll come to that in a moment.

During this era of crisis, it should not be thought that they didn't have time for religious controversies. In the seventh century, the big controversies continued to be those related to the natures of Christ. Even though the territories that were Monophysite had been taken by Islam, or at least the most Monophysite territories, there still are controversies trying to compromise this question of does Christ have one or two natures, how, if he has two natures, are these two related?

Rather than saying he has two natures, the emperors proposed two possible solutions. Christ is both God and human, but he's got one energy, Mono-energism. Well maybe he's both God and man, but he's got one will, Monothelitism. The emperors in the seventh century tried to impose Monothelitism, or tried to impose Monothelitism and then prohibit discussion, or just prohibit discussion about it.

The Papacy was adamant in upholding the two natures, one person. And this eventually won. But a huge amount of energy was expended in this controversy. And in the eighth and early ninth centuries, we then have Iconoclasm, which as we've spoken about, is the prohibition on the worship of icons.

Icons, again, are a form of religious art that remains characteristic of the Eastern Church. And the difference between icons and other forms of religious art is that they're portable. You can carry them around. And they are non-narrative; they don't tell a story.

So an icon doesn't have a depiction of the Annunciation or a depiction of events. They don't come in series, showing, for example, the life of a saint or the life of the Virgin. They are a single depiction.

The iconoclasts were worried about this as a form of idolatry. We're not sure where this concern came from. There is no evidence that it comes directly as a reaction to Islamic or Jewish criticism, although of course Islam and Judaism patrol the frontier against idol worship or image worship much more severely than does Christianity.

It does seem to be a reaction to the crisis. It does seem to be part of an effort to remake Byzantium into what I guess now would be called a leaner, more adroit, responsive, or that obnoxious business word, now, "robust", a robust response to the crisis imposed by Islam. Certainly it has something to do with that.

But what it really shows us is the role of the emperor in religion. The role of the secular ruler in the West is not as extensive, even as we will see soon under Charlemagne. Remember Chlothar and his attempts to dictate religious doctrine to Gregory of Tours, who, scared though he is of Chlothar, basically laughs at him? That shows a ruler who does not really have control, at least over the doctrine of his church, even if he's got a lot of control over the wealth of the Church. The Western tradition would tend to separate out ruler of the state and ruler of doctrine. The East less so.

This is partly just the way the Patriarch of Constantinople is situated. He's right next to the palace of the emperor, and so can be intimidated by the emperor. It is in the tradition of the Orthodox Church that there is less resistance to state authority on the part of the Church, more collaboration with state authority, and less controversy. This is the way it's normally taught, is that the emperor functions kind of like the Pope in the West. The emperor defines doctrine.

But actually, however much deference is paid to the emperor, and however much the emperor tries to define doctrine, the real story, certainly for our period, is of the lack of success of the emperors. The emperors constantly come down on the wrong side or come up with compromises or doctrines that don't work. They propose what in a sense seems like a rational compromise over Monophysitism, but theology doesn't work that way. Just because you come up with a compromise doesn't mean everybody's going to accept it. In fact, often compromises mean that nobody accepts it. It's not like a negotiation over political trade-offs. This is a theological truth.

So the emperors then create their own theological position. Iconoclasm is very much an imperial demand. And for a time, they succeed in imposing it. They succeed in imposing it for 120 years, off and on. Sometimes there will be an emperor who is a moderate iconoclast, but lets the icons come back. Sometimes there's an emperor's who's a moderate iconodule or iconophile.

But the emperors, even in the East, even where the emperor is so heavily involved in religion, have limitations on their ability to define doctrine. Nevertheless, clearly, they are the leaders of a besieged people who sees itself both as Christians against pagans or Muslims, or at least infidels, and as a religious people and as a secular population.

Chapter 4: Survival of the Byzantine Empire [00:30:27]

So with all of these crises, sieges, invaders, how did the Empire survive? We can see some of the plans of the emperors. One plan was simply to get out of Constantinople and rebuild a kind of Western empire based in the West. So Constans II-- you'll remember I said in 661-- moved his capital to Syracuse in Sicily. This was intended in part to guard the possessions in Italy and in part to hold onto North Africa. Constans was murdered in his bath in 668. The capitol was moved back to Constantinople, and within thirty years, all of North Africa had been lost to the Arabs. And you start to get the shape of the Empire to resemble that of the map that we looked at last, that of 1000, a Balkan/Anatolian empire.

Constans is very important, though, even though his plans come to naught. Because it seems to be under his reign-- not exclusively, but very much forwarded by him-- that two things develop that are crucial for Byzantine success. One is the practice of deporting whole peoples and settling them on new lands.

This extremely brutal practice-- you can imagine what it's like at any time. Of course, this is practiced a considerable amount, for example, in the former Soviet Union, where you just tell people to get up and you're going to move them 2,000 miles away. They're going to have better opportunities there or whatever. But in the meantime, some of them are going to starve. Many of them are going to fall to disease. This is a brutal kind of transporting of peoples, manipulation of peoples from one area to another.

The peoples manipulated in this case were often Slavic prisoners or groups taken over as the Empire expanded, and often sent to Anatolia to resettle lands that had been deserted in the Arab invasions and now seized back from the Arabs. This policy, against what one might expect, actually seems to work, to the extent that it does increase the population of these key frontier regions in the East with militarized forces transported from the Balkans.

Related to this is the organization of the army by locality instead of as a mobile and very large force. And this is related to the problems of paying the army. As far back as the beginning of the course, we said that a lot of imperial policy, just as it's true of the state today, is dictated by the need to pay for troops. The most expensive thing that most states, including the United States, does [correction: do] is maintain an army and use it. For a number of reasons, this is just a very, very expensive thing, and clearly a necessary thing, something that is not easy to dispense with.

Diocletian's reforms, indeed, the whole restructuring of the Empire in the late third century and early fourth century was oriented around increasing the size of the army-- basically, doubling it-- and figuring out a tax regime to pay for it. This no longer works in the post-Justinianic world, in the crucial era here and beyond. Because the state does not have enough money to pay these. It does not have a tax base. It cannot raise the money for a large army to operate in the Balkans and to oppose the Arabs without the tax revenues from its richest province, Egypt, and from other very wealthy and important provinces such as Syria.

How, then is, it going to have an army at all? To some extent, it is going to do this by creating local armies paid for not so much money as by kind-- that is to say, grain, leather, weapons, and things manufactured locally, harvested locally, and that stay locally. This is the so-called theme system. And Wickham doesn't talk too much about it because historians are in the process of drawing back from this. This is one of those frustrating things about progress in history. A lot of progress in history is the dismantling of convenient kinds of formulae.

So when I started teaching this, the themes were everything. I would have spent sixty percent of this lecture talking about the theme situation and how it saved the Byzantine Empire. The themes look like soldiers who are peasants. In other words, to some extent the deal that's offered to these troops is, we will give you land, and we will allow you to keep most of what you produce, rather than paying it as tribute to a landlord. But you've got to be willing to fight for it. You've got to owe military service. You've got to be ready for military service. And indeed, the land was often in places that were dangerous, places that were liable to invasion.

This is to some extent true, but it's a little less of a kind of Homestead Act deal. If you look at the map number three, the year 1000-- see the things that are in italic capitals like Opsikion, Armeniakon, Anatolikon? These are themes. They are large agglomerations of provinces. They are what might be called "military provinces". And as such, they combine civilian and military rule.

The Empire is now divided into military provinces. Nothing terribly new about that, even though the shape and the size is different. What's new is that, rather than the revenue being raised in cash from taxes paid all over the Empire, and then transported to Constantinople, and then disbursed to mercenaries or to standing armies, the money that's raised in the Opsikion tends to stay in the Opsikion. These provinces tend to be responsible for their soldiers and for paying their soldiers.

The state is very heavily involved. This is not a militia in the sense of a bunch of trusty guys getting their muskets or whatever they used off the wall. This is not Paul Revere, or something like that. But it is an army that is closer to the population and in which the male population is largely involved in the military forces. Another word that I don't particularly care for in its modern use: "stakeholder". They're stakeholders in the sense that it makes a big difference to them. They're not just civilians in this case.

This is, then, a militarization of society. It is a new way of paying for things in an economy that is less productive of revenues, at least of taxable revenues. And it is, above all, whatever its exact nature, an innovation that works. The basis for this expansion that takes place after 843, and indeed for the stabilization of the frontiers that proceeds it is a reorganization of the army, the theme system, a reorganization of revenues, and a kind of strategic plan to define the Byzantine Empire in a way that is ultimately feasible and defensible.

From 717 to 843, the Empire recovers slowly. We choose 843 because that's the end of the iconoclast controversy. The Empire continued to have to fight on both fronts against the Arabs and the Bulgars. But it had a viable state, a viable military structure, and some capable emperors.

Chapter 5: Expansion of the Byzantine Empire [00:39:33]

After 843, we see a real rebirth and expansion. From 843 to 1000, the Empire grew by about one third. Even though that map, the third one, for the year 1000, doesn't seem very imposing, if you take a look at it, you'll see that its frontiers with Islam are much more secure than they have been before.

The Empire extends eastward as far as Armenia, for a long time a frontier province, and it is on the borders of Syria. It has the great city of Antioch again. It has all of Anatolia. It has the islands of Cyprus and Crete, which had been occupied by Islamic forces for years. It has control over all of modern Greece and has held onto some possessions in Italy.

This is an era of great splendor, ceremony, the restoration of education, and of learning. The Bulgars will be defeated definitively by 1019. Constantinople would be besieged by them twice. You can't have a century without a couple of sieges of Constantinople. The Abbasids are defeated, and the expansion of the Byzantine Empire, as you see, as far south as modern Lebanon and as far east as modern Armenia-- well, historic Armenia.

This is a society that is still involved in religious controversy. This is-- in the ninth century with the Carolingians, there would be a controversy over the holy ghost in relation to the son and the father, the so-called "filioque controversy".

But it is a world of great energy: artistic, cultural, and actually religious. Perhaps the most lasting and significant accomplishment of this era is the conversion of the Slavs and the conversion of much of Eastern Europe-- conversion to what would become the Orthodox as opposed to Catholic form of Christianity.

The official split between the Orthodox world and the Catholic world won't occur until 1054. In 1054, the Patriarch of Constantinople excommunicated the Pope and the Pope excommunicated the Patriarch of Constantinople. I think they've taken it back, but obviously the Churches are not joined.

They have differences already, however, that are visible in the ninth and tenth centuries. Orthodoxy is less politically centralized. If, as we just said, it's very dependent on the ruler, if the ruler is different, then the Church has a sort of national identity. Thus, there is no Pope in the Orthodox Church. The Bulgarian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Russian Orthodox essentially form a confederation under their own patriarchs.

They also have their own languages. The Bible could be translated into vernacular, and the liturgy was not in one language necessarily. So Slavonic, the ancestor of modern Slavic languages, would be instituted as the liturgy in many of these converted places. Priests are allowed to marry in the Orthodox Church.

There were just, sort of, questions of style. For example, the Orthodox Church, even when it has admitted icons back, does not have statues, does not have three-dimensional statues, whereas the Catholic world, of course, does. Think of Notre Dame of Paris and its sculptural program or Chartres or the Michelangelo and Bernini sacred sculptures. This is partly because, while icons are OK because they're two-dimensional, statues were thought of as being too much like the idols denounced again and again by the Old Testament. Greek Orthodox priests have beards; Catholic priests don't.

They're different styles of worship. In Orthodox churches, you stand; there aren't seats. Some of this is style. Some of this is theology. Some of this is just culture. But of course, this would be in the ninth century and remain a very strong difference. So you can see that those countries converted by the Catholics have a Latin liturgy and a Western or Latin or Roman orientation. Poland is Catholic. Russia, on the other hand, would be converted to Byzantine Christianity.

The division is clear and unfortunately tragic in the former Yugoslavia. Serbian and Croatian are almost the same language. Serbian is written in Cyrillic, Croatian in Roman. The Croatians are Catholics; the Serbians are Orthodox. Their hatred for each other, and then of course the complication of having an Islamic people, the Bosnians, was the background to the tragic Yugoslav Civil War of the early 1990s. So these religious boundaries, which sort of correspond to ethnic boundaries-- even though those ethnic definitions are themselves invented, to some extent-- these religious boundaries continue to be very meaningful and to define culture in Europe.

The conversion of this world is, then, one of the most important events of the renascent Byzantine Empire. The coronation of the king of Russia, the king of Kievan Russia, in 989 at Cherson on the Crimean Peninsula, presided over by emissaries of the Byzantine Emperor is one symbol of this. The conversion of the Bulgars. The conversion of many of the peoples of the Balkans.

And indeed, there is a kind of aftermath of Byzantine civilization. The closest heir to the Eastern Roman Empire is the Russian Empire. The look of Orthodox worship, the look of the Russian churches, the icons, the gold, the imperial style is very closely related, self-consciously, to the model established by the Byzantine emperors. Indeed, in the sixteenth century, after the fall of Constantinople, Russian monks claimed that there had been three Romes: the Rome of the West, the original one, had fallen in the fifth century; the great Eastern Rome, that of Constantinople, had fallen in the fifteenth; and the third Rome was Moscow.

I don't think that outside of the Russian orbit most people think of Moscow as the third Rome for a number of reasons, whatever its power and its own form of splendor. But the degree to which Russia in its history is the heir to the world that we have briefly described cannot be denied, even if to some extent it is a self-formed or self-conscious manifestation.

Moving from Byzantium, on Wednesday, we will come back to friendly old Francia and discuss the rise and efflorescence of the Carolingians. Thanks.

Lecture 19 - Charlemagne [November 9, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Today, ladies and gentlemen, we move back to Northern Europe to the northern part of the former Roman Empire. And since you've done the reading, I won't be giving anything away by saying that the culmination of what we're talking about is Charlemagne and Charlemagne's coronation in Rome at the hands of the Pope in the year 800 as emperor.

We'll talk about what that title means, a title that had not been seen in 325 years in the West, at least not agreed upon by everyone in Western Europe.

Charlemagne, at this time, didn't control quite everything in Western Europe. You have a map in the Wickham book of his empire, bequeathed to his successors in the year 843, the year that it is partitioned. This does not include the British Isles. It does not include most of Spain, which was in Islamic hands. But it is a pretty convincing effort at the restoration of the Roman Empire, even though its base-- in other words, where Charlemagne and his ancestors' lands were, where their wealth came from, where they lived, where their followers came from-- was at what had been the borders of the Roman Empire, what's now northeastern France, Belgium, the Netherlands, west northwestern Germany-- a territory known at this time as Austrasia.

Charlemagne's ancestors were great men, major nobles of the region of Austrasia-- again, eastern France, western Germany, the Low Countries. They were nominal servants of the Merovingian rulers and rose to prominence with a title of maior. And Wickham preserves just the Latin, maior-- major, larger, great man. The maior of the palace-- "the mayor of the palace" is how this is usually translated. And of course, our word mayor applies to a municipal official. So mayor of the palace is a rather funny title. But it's really a kind of prime minister or leader of the soldiers-- prime minister and defense secretary or minister.

And this title tended to be hereditary. One of the problems of rulers in Merovingian world, in the Lombard world, in all of Western Europe, is controlling their mighty servants. Because these people were not just easy to fire, you couldn't just cut their salaries or stop their paycheck, because they're not getting a paycheck. They are the leaders of soldiers. They own castles, fortifications. But most of all, they own land. And as landowners and as established powers within the society, their power rivals-- and in the case of Charlemagne's ancestors-- would exceed the power of the king. So these are not people who are easy to dislodge. And they are people who tend to want their power to be not appointive but hereditary-- in other words, to bequeath titles like mayor of the palace to their sons.

I mention this now because next week we'll see this is a problem that Charlemagne's descendants would have. They would have the same problem. How do you make your officials that you've appointed listen to you, obey your orders, if you don't have sufficient coercive power to remove them? And the reason you don't have sufficient coercive power to remove them, again, is because they are military officials, they have their own followers, they are well-established in various territories, and so they're hard to tame. They are becoming little kings themselves. And a key aspect of the ability to become a local ruler, even though officially you're subject to the real king of a large realm, is because it's become hereditary. It's become a family property.

This tendency to decentralization, inheritance, and weakened royal power is often called "feudalism," a word that you may as well write down-- you've heard of it-- but which we're not going to use. And we're not going to use it for a couple of reasons, one of which is nobody uses the term at the time. It carries a lot of other overtones that are not relevant to us, and really insofar as it has use, it describes a later period, a History 211 kind of reality, a post-year 1000 reality.

But what is to be recalled is that, once you no longer have an official state apparatus with an administrative structure or bureaucracy like Diocletian, like Constantine, like Justinian, or even like those Byzantine emperors we were talking about, or like the Abbasid Caliphate-- all of those are complex structures of state bureaucracies funded by taxation. Here we have something that is not that sort of polity. It is more personal. It is more military. It depends more on plunder, on expansion, on charisma, that is, personal ability to get people to obey you. It has a very rudimentary structure. And the success of a state is judged on the basis of its ability to survive, even if the ruler doesn't have charisma, even if the ruler's not all that great. Because people obey the state, they obey its officials, they obey the idea of the state, and not the individual personality.

So we're going to talk about Charlemagne's ancestors and how they got into power, how they went from being mighty servants, but servants nonetheless, to kings of France and eventually, in 800, emperors.

Chapter 2: The Last Years of the Merovingians [00:07:41]

What happened to the Merovingians? Last time we checked, the Merovingians were certainly kicking people around Francia, warring with each other, occasionally regretting it and burning the tax rolls, but pretty quickly returning to the old plunder, and killing people, and having fun kind of barbarian economy.

The Merovingian dynasty lasts to the mid-eighth century. But for its last hundred years, roughly 650 to 750, its rulers are ineffective. They have the title "kings." They have great prestige. But they are weak. A lot of our understanding of their position really is simply a gloss, or an elaboration, of a few lines of Einhard, the biographer of Charlemagne, whom you've read.

"The family of the Merovingians," he says on page 16 of this book, "From which the Franks used to make their kings, is thought to have lasted down to King Childeric whom Pope Stephen ordered deposed. His long hair was shorn, and he was forced into a monastery." Remember, one of the symbols of Merovingian familial prestige was this long hair. But Carolingians had short hair and wore mustaches. They kind of broke with the Merovingian look. But of course, this is not just a male fashion statement.

"Although it might seem that the Merovingian family ended with him, it had in fact been without any vitality for a long time." The Merovingians were just given a little shove, because they were already basically finished. "There was nothing of any worth in it, except for the empty name of king. For both the riches and power of the kingdom were in possession of the prefects of the palace," this is how he's translating it, "who were called the mayors of the palace, and to them fell the highest command. Nothing was left for the king to do except to sit on his throne with his hair long and his beard uncut, satisfied to hold the name of king only and pretending to rule. Except for the empty name of king and a meager living allowance, which the prefect of the court extended to him, he possessed nothing else of his own but one estate and a very small income."

Now, so much depends on these words of Einhard, who then goes on to describe them going around in these ceremonial carts, people acclaiming them. But everybody knows that if they want anything done, the person to talk to is the mayor of the palace.

It's to Einhard's interest, or at least to the interests of the Carolingians for whom he's writing, to make it appear as if the Merovingians were already finished. But nevertheless, it's clear that they were much weaker than the people we've been reading about in Gregory of Tours. What happened to them? Well, one possibility that Einhard, in effect, sort of encourages is that something happened to the family. They were weak personalities; maybe they had some hereditary degeneration. Or, they ran out of money. They did not have lands to reward their followers anymore. Remember that in this economy, this is not something in which tax revenues are funding the state. Up to a point they are, because we saw that Fredegund and Childeric had tax revenues-- at least, tax records-- to burn. But as the inheritance of Rome-- Roman administration, Roman literacy, Roman organization-- frayed, as that inheritance became further and further degraded, the ability to tax the population-- rural, dispersed-- dwindled. So it's not only a question of the administrative decline but of the economic decline, or at least the economic decentralization of the way people lived.

The Merovingians had depended an awful lot on war and on the plunder received from war. You'll remember that when we were talking about Clotar, the son of Clovis, that his men rebelled when he didn't want to fight the Saxons. That's not just because they're warlike savages, or insofar as they're warlike savages, they're also in it for treasure, plunder.

Beowulf is a plunder-driven world. The author of Beowulf is well aware that this is stupid, in a way. Right? The dragon has all this plunder. And what does he do with it? Dragons are not consumers. He lies on beds of gold coins and beautiful armor and all sorts of things that have been seized. He has absolutely no use for all of this stuff. And yet, stealing just a little tiny ring or a little bit of it enrages him. And so he starts his depredations out of anger at that.

The Merovingians, once they stop expanding, don't have the opportunities to keep their economy going, their source of income going. And in particular, they lose the ability, so it would seem, to reward their followers. Their followers, their knights, to call them that anachronistically, their military entourage does not flourish by being paid because there's very little in the way of coinage. There is very little in the way of revenues. They benefit from things like land, but as you are running out of plunder and giving away land, then sooner or later you, yourself, the giver of land, will not have any more to give. That's another hypothesis about Merovingian decline.

In fact, there is an effort by a mayor of the palace of the late seventh century to depose the Merovingian king-- a man named Grimoald, who is an ancestor of Charlemagne. But this is unsuccessful. He tries to depose a Merovingian ruler. And even though the Merovingians are weak, their other followers prevent Grimoald from succeeding. And indeed, he's executed.

The prestige of the Merovingians was such that even if they were not effective, they were still the kings because the blood of Clovis flowed in their veins. And this was symbolized by their familial distinctiveness, which included the long hair, the uncut beard, the traveling around in carts.

This is important because it means that you could not succeed by direct action against the Merovingians, at least not in 661, when Grimoald was killed.

In order to make this happen-- in other words, even though he was killed, his successors remained as mayors of the palace. They were tightly enough ensconced or inserted into the structures of power and successful enough as a family that they were able to survive, but as mayors of the palace. Looked at from the long term-- that is from the perspective of 751, the year when Pippin declared himself King of the Franks and deposed that last Merovingian ruler-- looked at from that perspective, the strategy of the dynasty which we can call Carolingians, even though we're not yet at Charlemagne, the strategy of the Carolingians was to come up with another rationale for why they should be kings and not the Merovingians, what we can call "legitimacy".

Chapter 3: Establishing Carolingian Legitimacy [00:16:44]

Legitimacy in politics is the sense that the people who are ruling are ruling for good reason, that their rule is legitimate. This can be on the basis of an election: "I may not like the president, but he was elected in a fair election, therefore I accept the fact that he's president." It may be triumph in war: "This emperor came to power, deposed his predecessor, and got the Bulgars off our back, therefore his rule is legitimate." It may be economic benefit: "This guy has made my life easier economically or I have the feeling that things are going right." It may be dynasty: "This is the oldest son of the former king." The British rulers just changed to end discrimination between men and women in the succession. Obviously, Britain has a queen rather than a king and has for the last sixty years, but the favored candidate would be a male child. The circumstances of Elizabeth's succession don't need to detain us, but she was not the logical eldest-- obviously not the eldest male child.

So there are all sorts of ways of having legitimacy as a ruler. The challenge for the mayors of the palace was to create this legitimacy. And they did it by several different means. It's not that there's this project where they set out in year 662 and say, "Within ninety years we're coming to power, and here's how we're going to do it." It is historians who impose that rational strategy. But nevertheless, it is discernible.

In fact, they are mayors of the palace of several different pieces, because the Merovingian realm was not unified. It was in particular pieces. So these guys are the mayors of the palace of Austrasia. So their opponents include the other kingdoms, particularly Neustria which is more or less the region of Paris, the Seine, the central to northern part of modern France, but further west than Austrasia. So Austrasia is northeast; Neustria is more central and slightly south.

So there are lots of rivals. It's a very dangerous situation. It's a very violent world. But this is their plan. A lot of what they, that is the Carolingians, the ancestors of Charlemagne, accomplished was military. This is the bottom line of leadership in the period we're dealing with. Without military prestige and military success, it's very hard to craft a polity, let alone hand it down to your descendants.

What is more unusual than military leadership, however, is that the Carolingians allied themselves to the Church. Their legitimacy as rulers would be based very much on an alliance with the Church, and in particular, with the papacy.

The Bishop of Rome is someone whom we haven't talked about very much. We mentioned Leo I back in the fifth century, who was responsible for negotiating with the Huns in the absence of the emperor and who also upheld doctrinal orthodoxy against Monophysitism. But the pope was not inevitably the sole ruler of the Church in the way he would become in the modern world within the Catholic Church.

The pope was the Bishop of Rome. He was the guardian of some of the chief relics of the Christian world, the relics of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, the apostles. He was the inheritor of the aura of the city of Rome, the imperial city. He even had appropriated some titles from the Roman emperors, such as Pontifex Maximus, an old pagan title.

So the pope is the inheritor of a lot of Roman imperial prestige, but he is a beleaguered inheritor of that. In fact, the pope's life in Rome was dangerous. He was often eclipsed by or threatened by the Lombards. The Lombards, a barbarian tribe who had invaded Italy-- we talked about them last time. They invaded in 568. They took most of Italy from Justinian's heirs. They were Arian for a longer time than other barbarian tribes. And even when they ceased to be Arian, they were eager to seize Rome. They weren't overwhelmingly eager to seize Rome because they never did it, but they threatened the pope.

During the seventh century, the pope considered himself the ally of the Byzantine Empire. The emperors continued to intervene, to debate various doctrinal things. But as the Lombard threat grew, as the Byzantine emperors were iconoclast, the pope cast around for a new protector, beginning in really the 720s, 730s.

And so the alliance between Carolingians and popes is natural, in the sense that they both want something out of the other. The Carolingians, the mayors of the palace, want legitimacy. They want to be sacred figures within the Christian world, to trump the pre-Christian aura of the Merovingians. And the pope, out of the Carolingians, wants protection from the Lombards and a sense of rule over most of Europe that will favor the Church and allow the Church to advance its work.

The means of cementing this alliance, however, are interestingly enough monks. The people who are the shock troops of the Christianization of Europe, the expansion of Europe, of the Church, and the furtherance of its mission are monks, many of them from Ireland and Britain, who would try to convert the countryside, either those places that were minimally Christian or, beginning in the late seventh and early eighth centuries, extend Christianity to places like Holland or central Germany that were not parts of the Roman Empire and had never been Christian.

So these monastic settlements not only converted the countryside, but they served as foci for economic and social development. There was an alliance between the mayors of the palace and monks such as the English monk, Saint Boniface, Apostle to the Germans. Saint Boniface, in the eighth century, would convert a lot of the Germans in and east of the Rhine. He would receive support from the mayors of the palace of Austrasia, because this is east of where they are, and they're interested in expanding and settling there. And he received support from the pope who is interested in the conversion of Christians. And so it's through intermediaries like Saint Boniface and other monks that the countryside gets converted and that the Carolingians and the pope approach each other.

Why monks? Who are these guys? When we looked at the Benedictine world, it seemed as if monks were supposed to be enclosed in their monasteries and not wander around? These are somewhat special monks. These are wandering monks. The Irish tradition was different from the Benedictine tradition and encouraged wandering as a form of penance. If you wanted to do penance or to experience the power of God and randomness in the world, which would you rather do-- pray seven times a day in the same place for decades, or just kind of like wander around, try to convert people, and see if you could get martyred?

Certainly, the latter is dangerous. The latter is truly dangerous. But these are very enterprising guys. We just have this idea. Oh yeah, monks pray or they copy manuscripts or they wander around and convert people-- all of which are insanely difficult things to do. You really have to admire these guys.

So many of them are from Ireland, or from recently-converted Anglo-Saxon England. Anglo-Saxon England combines a Benedictine structure with some of this inheritance of Irish wandering.

But it is these monasteries that are founded in the countryside of Germany, of the Netherlands, and the alliances between the mayors of the palace and the papacy that are key in creating the Carolingian dynasty.

Chapter 4: Charles Martel and Pepin the Short [00:27:23]

The mayors of the palace of Austrasia come to preeminence in the Merovingian realms in the early eighth century. One of the key events here is one that we've looked at from several sides now and that will be, I hope, familiar to you. And that is the Battle of Poitiers in 733, also known as the Battle of Tours.

This is the battle in which the Arabs were defeated in northern France, and eventually retreated to Spain. 733 marks the high water point of Arab incursions into Europe and is, in a sense, a parallel to 717, the defeat of the Siege of Constantinople.

The victor at Poitiers was the mayor of the palace of Austrasia, a man named Charles Martel, "the Hammer." He doesn't have a last name. It's sort of a [clarification: a sobriquet]-- Charles Martel. And he gained tremendous prestige from this. That legitimation that we said comes from military leadership certainly was his. The Merovingian king was nowhere to be seen at that battle. It was led by the mayor of the palace.

Charles' son, Pepin the Short, started really to put together these aspects of rule. Pepin the Short, 741 to 768. Now there's something going on here that I don't have an explanation for. If he really was short-- yet we know from digging up his body that Charlemagne was on the order of 6' 7". Charlemagne is really tall for pre-modern people. He's really, really tall. And Einhard describes him as tall. Einhard says his voice was kind of squeaky and high, given just how huge he was. I don't know how that works. Many of you are more advanced in science and genetics than me. But my pet theory, since Pepin's body hasn't been found, is that actually he was really tall too and that he's called Pepin the Short as a kind of joke; you know like guys nicknamed Tiny are often 350 pounders. I'm just saying.

Pepin the Short is the person who crystallizes this potential alliance among papacy, missionaries, and mayors of the palace. And in doing so, he transforms Europe. He favored the Church. He could mobilize his new power and legitimacy through this alliance with the Church. He encouraged various kinds of monastic reforms urged by Saint Boniface, which meant better discipline over priests, more councils of bishops, the restoration of lands to the Church, and a role for the king as the guardian and protector of the Church.

It may be at Boniface's instigation that Pepin wrote to the pope, Zacharias at this time, asking, "Is it right for the man who holds the power not to wear the crown, while the person who wears the crown does not hold the power?" He asks this as if it were a hypothetical question. "Oh, you know, we were just discussing this last night and wondered what you think." But of course, the pope is quite aware of what's at stake and says it is wrong for the person who holds the power not to hold the crown; whereupon in 751, Pepin had himself elected king of the Franks, deposed and put in a monastery the last Merovingian king, and by his being put in the monastery, he was tonsured, that is to say much of his hair was cut off, desacrilizing him. And unlike Grimoald's failed coup d'etat, this was totally, peacefully, no problem, greeted by everybody, successful.

In 753, two years later, the new pope, Stephen, made an unprecedented-- literally unprecedented-- journey across the Alps. No pope had ever been in northern Europe until this year. And he crowned Pepin. He was desperate over the situation with the Lombards. And in return, Pepin led an expedition that, although not the definitive invasion of Italy that Charlemagne would undertake, at least gave the pope some breathing room and defeated the Lombards.

At Pepin's death in 768, he was succeeded by his son, Charles, and his other son Carloman. Charles-- the future Charles the Great, Charlemagne. Carloman died in 771, maybe naturally, maybe not, leaving Charlemagne as the sole ruler. Charlemagne at this point is king of the Franks, inheritor of the title and accomplishments of his father. He was the beneficiary, then, of well over a hundred years of Carolingian ascent. And let's just review the factors that had aided his predecessors-- the weakness of the Merovingians; their position as mayors of the palace; the activity of monks, missionaries to Germany and the eastern part of the Frankish world; Byzantine weakness and the Lombard threat; and, of course, Byzantine flirting with heresies like Iconoclasm.

The result is then a kind of geopolitical shift of the papacy towards the North. Another chapter in that long book of the end of Mediterranean hegemony. Instead of looking to the eastern Mediterranean for protection and for the ruler who was his natural ally, the pope now looks to a northern transalpine ruler.

Chapter 5: Charlemagne [00:34:51]

Charlemagne you've read about. And you've read Einhard's biography of him. It is, in some sense, at least a seemingly artless biography. He obviously likes him, admires him, but he describes him as a real person. We learn that he liked baths and roast meat, that he had a high voice, that he loved having his daughters around him but probably kind of mistreated them by not allowing them to marry. And then Einhard is scandalized that since they couldn't marry, they had all sorts of guys hanging around.

We get a sense of Charlemagne's personality. Charlemagne is a man very much at home in his time. He is comfortable with being a warrior. He would lead campaigns year after year after year. At the same time, he is a person of learning, or at least a person who believes learning is important. Einhard tells us that he never quite really learned to read and write, that he tried, that he slept with Augustine's City of God by his side, which is an impressive thing to do as bedtime reading. And we also know that he is pious. His piety does not interfere with his enjoyment of life or with his harsh prosecution of military campaigns. He¡¯s not a sensitive person. He¡¯s not a self-examining kind of character.

But very important is that his notion of leadership combines what might be thought three available forms of legitimacy of this era. One, and the most important, is military prestige and power, war leadership. And he conquered lots of peoples. It was not just a question of war leadership with no results. He had tremendous results.

He conquered the Lombards in Italy in 774. He conquered the Avars in the 790s. So much treasure did he seize from them-- remember we saw the Avars as besiegers of Constantinople? By this time, they're in more-or-less modern Hungary. He seized so much treasure that the entire economy of his empire basically was financed on the basis of this plunder until his death in 814, so for nearly twenty years.

He conquered the Bavarians. He conquered the Saxons in northern, eastern Germany, a very, very difficult series of campaigns from 774 to 806 that involved large numbers of civilian casualties, virtual exterminations of peoples, and forced conversion. It was the first real, sustained campaign of forced conversion to Christianity in European history. Brutal, but successful, opening up really the definition of modern Germany.

Much of what the modern German state is, in its central and eastern parts, in the north, is Saxon. There is a part called Saxony still, a province of the former East Germany. But in fact, a province, or a land as they're called, of the former West Germany is called, Nieder-Sachsen, Lower-Saxony. So the Saxons are spread throughout northern Germany. And by Charlemagne's death, Germany or the eastern Frankish realm starts to look like something familiar.

He conquers a bit in Spain against the Muslims. His forces would seize Barcelona in the year 801. But he does not get as far as he had hoped. In particular, he had hoped to take Saragossa. His army was defeated by, actually, Basques. But their defeat leads to the literary triumph known as the Song of Roland, one of the great works of the Middle Ages in which the enemy are Muslims. And the Song of Roland is a great sort of Crusade ideology text which shows, in its own words, that Christians are right, pagans are wrong. Of course, they call the Muslims pagans. They depict them as worshipping Apollo, and Termagent, and other gods. They know that the Muslims are not literally pagans. But it has higher rhetorical value.

Charlemagne is tremendously successful as a war leader then. His second form of power and legitimacy is as a Christian ruler. He is a man with a vision of a Christian polity, of alliance with the Church, and as seeing himself as responsible for the spiritual health of his people. This is important, this latter responsibility, because it has a lot to do with the program of education that we'll be talking about next week, the intellectual air of his court.

He believes himself, therefore, to be not just somebody who is supposed to convert the Saxons forcibly, but is supposed to educate his population into becoming Christians of a real sort. This also means that he is allied with the pope and believes that the pope is capable of aiding him in more than merely symbolic ways.

The third aspect of power and legitimacy is the legacy of Rome. It is the thing that unifies this entire course. Charlemagne, according to Einhard, went to Rome to rescue the pope yet again, not this time from the Lombards in 800, but from the Roman factions. Pope Leo III was rescued by Charlemagne, put back in Rome. Charlemagne, Einhard tells us, went to Saint Peter's on Christmas Day to pray. And lo and behold, the pope jumped out from behind a pillar and put the crown on his head and he was acclaimed Roman emperor. And Charlemagne said later, he wouldn't have gone-- even though it was Christmas-- he wouldn't have gone to church at all if he'd known this was going to happen.

We can be cynical about the surprise aspect of this, or about Charlemagne's uncharacteristic modesty. Nevertheless, we have to think about the implications of the pope crowning the emperor. Constantine wasn't crowned by a pope. The problem with having someone crown you is that it could be implied that he is the one who bestows the crown and could decide not to crown someone in the future. It looks as if he's the more powerful one. He's standing; he's putting the crown on you; and you're kneeling.

Indeed, as an evocation of this, almost exactly 1,000 years later in 1804, when Napoleon had himself crowned by the pope, Napoleon seized the crown from the pope's hands and put in on himself, put it on his own head, in a direct reference to Charlemagne.

So Roman, Christian, and military leadership. Of these, the Roman is the most impressive and the most sort of historically dramatic, but probably the least significant at the time. Charlemagne did not consider his empire to be exactly the same thing as the Roman Empire. He would divide it. The fact that he handed it over to one son is that he only ended up having one surviving son. But he had plans to divide it. It's not clear if he regarded the imperial title as anything that would really survive. Nevertheless, he was an emperor; and an emperor meaning that he ruled over many peoples. He was more than just the king of the Franks because he now ruled over Barbarians, Avars, Visigoths, Lombards.

He had made a good stab at restoring the Roman Empire in the West. But it's a different Roman Empire. Its base is not really in Rome nor even in Milan or Ravenna, the late Roman imperial capitals of the fifth century. It is in Aachen, a city in Austrasia where remains of his palace chapel still stand. His lands, influence, cronies, family, political base, economic base, military recruiting base, are all in northern Europe. Charlemagne is, then in some sense, the reviver of the Roman Empire. But he is also the founder of Europe as something not just a geographical expression but a cultural expression.

Whether it is a socio-political expression, time will tell. When the European Union, the Euro, and all these things that are sort of semi-unraveling now were cemented in their current form in the early 1990s, the treaties that established that were deliberately made in the territories that are neither French nor German entirely, but are really part of the old Carolingian patrimony. The treaties in places like Maastricht, the location of Brussels as the capitol of the European Union, all of this is really evocative of the empire of Charlemagne. These are the lands of the Carolingians and this is, in the next thousand years, in certain respects the center of Europe. We'll talk more about the Carolingians next week.

Lecture 20 - Intellectuals and the Court of Charlemagne [November 14, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction to the Carolingian Renaissance [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: Right. I've put these names on the board because today we're talking about the so-called Carolingian Renaissance, the revival of learning under Charlemagne and his successors. But the figures of this Renaissance, the intellectuals of Charlemagne's court, of the court of Louis the Pious, the court of Charles the Bald are not household names. And I just want to give you a sample-- and it is no more than a sample-- of these men. And I'm afraid they all were men. And most of them monks or other kinds of clerics.

And what I want to do today is remind you for the first, to start, we said last time that Charlemagne's rule was based on a combination of traditional war leadership, similar to that Merovingians; an alliance with the Church, similar to the Merovingians, but much closer - Much closer in the sense of seeing the legitimation of rule, up to the point of emperor, as a product of what later would be called "sacred monarchy". In other words, that the kingship was not just rulership over the populace, or over warriors-- it was that-- but it was also a responsibility-- a ministry is the word that's used-- to see to the salvation of the public good. Not just the secular benefit of the public good, as in a modern state, but to the salvation of the people that God would hold the emperor, the king, responsible for this.

And then the third element was to revive the Roman Empire. And not just as a political entity, but the Roman Empire as a state. As a form of rulership for the benefit of a diverse population, not just one nation, like the Franks or the Lombards or the Saxons, but of a kind of imperial confederation.

The Carolingian Renaissance is a planned one, unlike the regular old Italian Renaissance, which is a spontaneous revival of learning in several different cities on the parts of intellectuals. The Italian Renaissance, like most revivals of learning, might have been patronized by secular rulers, but its impetus was not the state.

In this case, however, we have a program of reviving Latin, reviving the classical literature and texts, teaching these subjects. And all of this not in aid of what we would call a purely educational program, but to help the state and to help its mission, which as we've just said, is both a Christian and a Roman one.

The revival of letters was intended, then, to restore and deepen the piety of the population, the understanding of Christianity, the restoration of the Church as an intellectual force, the preservation of learning from both Roman secular and religious texts. So that Charlemagne's cultural program is the culmination of a longer period of trying to save something from the wreckage of classical civilization. And thus, as a Christian ruler and as a Roman emperor, Charlemagne surrounded himself with these and other intellectuals, monks, and scholars.

In order to understand this mission, however, beyond just saying oh, Christianity or classical culture, we have to go back to some topics we touched on very lightly when we were talking about monasticism. And that have cropped up now and then. So I want to start out with the preservation of learning up to the point that Charlemagne really starts putting together this program around 780 AD.

Chapter 2: The Preservation of Learning before the Carolingians [00:04:40]

You'll remember, and you will have seen from Augustine's Confessions, among other things, that the ideal of Roman culture at the time of the Empire was cultivated leisure on the part of wealthy, well-educated lay people. That is to say, even after Constantine's conversion, the intellectuals of the Empire tended to be not clergy, but wealthy people who could afford the leisure, the time, and the expense of procuring books, and of discussing them. These were the people who represented the continuation of the literary and philosophical traditions of classical Greece and Rome.

And this also had a practical benefit just as, rather in a different way, it does now. In order to enter Roman governmental service, which was the most successful career path of the time of Saint Augustine and had been for some centuries, you needed to have an education of a certain rather rarefied higher sort. And this is not unique to the Roman Empire, it was true of Imperial China, most obviously.

In China, you had to pass a very tough exam, a very selective exam, in order to be a part of the highest level of the imperial service. And the exam was not a political science exam or a business decisions kind of exam. It wasn't like you have a certain kind of budget and you've got to allocate resources. It's not a problem set. It was poetry. It was ancient culture.

And the same thing is true of the British Empire in the nineteenth century. In order to enter its highest levels, you needed to know Greek and Latin. Not because you were going to use them governing some colony in Southeast Asia, for example. But because that was what made you an educated person.

So the centers of learning in the ancient world included Athens, the Platonic and Athenian academies; Pergamum in Asia Minor, the name of which city gave its name to parchment; Alexandria, which had an entity called the Museum, which was not what we now call a museum, but rather kind of library and research center; Constantinople, later.

Alexandria is the most famous because it had this magnificent library as part of the museum, and the mystery of what happened to this library, allegedly burned by the Muslims in the eighth century on the grounds that you didn't need to know anything except what's in the Koran. And this is not true. The library had disappeared long before the eighth century and probably was the victim of the kinds of disorders that began in the third century, when we began the course, the kind of disruptions of local society, opportunities for plunder, neglect. And the Museum was actually closed by the emperor Caracalla in the third century.

So the major problem of the Roman Empire in terms of the diminution of learning is not the burning of Alexandria or such dramatic events, it's a much more gradual process. And this gradual process involved what we have at various times, using Wickham's language, called "the radical simplification of material culture". Which means not only a lack of imported goods, more primitive accommodations, less trade and commerce, but also much less in the way of books and learning.

This is also related to the disappearance of lay literacy. The people who were capable of reading and writing in Latin, as of, let's say, the sixth century, are overwhelmingly clerics. And not all that many of them, either. The last grand figures of Roman classical culture are Boethius and Cassiodorus.

And we've mentioned them already, but they bear [clarification: bear repeating]-- Boethius, 480 ¨C 524. And Cassiodorus, 490 ¨C 585. Cassiodorus was a monk. And it is his accomplishment to join monasticism to the preservation of learning. And he had a very long life to do it as well. Reminding us that not everybody just kicked off of the age of thirty-five in the pre-industrial world. Boethius didn't have a particularly long life, because he was executed by the Ostrogothic king, Theodoric, suspected of treason and plotting with Byzantium.

Boethius could still work in his personal library in Rome, where the light filtered in through alabaster windows -- the Beinecke Library idea -- Onto cupboards stacked with Greek and Roman papyrus books. But Boethius was among the last secular intellectuals in the west, and particularly one of the last to know Greek as well as Latin. He conceived a project of translating the great works of Greek philosophy into Latin, which would have included all of Plato and Aristotle. But he was cut off by his arrest, torture, and execution after just having done some introductory textbooks and just a smattering of Plato and Aristotle.

After him and the Justinianic invasion of Italy, Italy was devastated. And even though it will remain a repository of manuscripts, its learning was preserved as a guttering flame by monks like Cassiodorus and, almost accidentally, by the monks who followed the rule of Saint Benedict. Saint Benedict does, as you'll recall, require reading. But it's usually during Lent, and it's a kind of penance.

The contribution of Cassiodorus is the organization of a more library-like kind of monastery. And the notion that classical culture is not just a collection of text about a discredited religion, but necessary for Christian interpretation of the Bible and Christian learning.

At his monastery of Vivarium in southern Italy, Cassiodorus developed a notion of the liberal arts as an aid to religious truth. The liberal arts is not his invention, but the notion of the liberal arts culminating in a program that has a purpose in which classical culture is fused with Christian culture is his doing. He was not so much interested in the aesthetic pleasure of these classical texts as in their use for interpreting the Bible.

The Bible, according to his, Augustine's, and virtually everybody's understanding of the time, is not a text that makes perfect sense in every respect literally. It is the book of life that God has set up for us, but it requires interpretation. It is not just a literal text, it is a figurative and prophetic one as well. And in order to get at what it really means, what its real messages are, you have to know things like mathematics, astronomy, geometry, even music, and certainly grammar, rhetoric, and logic. These are the seven liberal arts of Cassiodorus's curriculum.

They're arranged in the three basic-- the trivium, as it came to be called. The three, not because of trivial, although that's where the word comes from. The trivium. I-U-M. T-R-I-V-I-U-M. Logic, grammar, rhetoric. Now, I'm in this sort of Rick Perry moment.

The quadrivium, there are four of them. OK? Arithmetic, astronomy, geometry, and music. OK. So I got all of them. The quadrivium are the sciences. You don't think music is a science? In the late Roman medieval imagination, it was the science of intervals and of pleasing forms and of modes.

The replication of this plan of Cassiodorus is the accomplishment of this period in which classical learning and its texts were endangered. The Benedictine monks of Italy-- question? Something I missed?

Student: I'm sorry. What was the four?

Professor Paul Freedman: The four-- the quadrivium. Quad, Q-U-A-D-R-I-V-I-U-M. Sorry, what were they?

Student: Yeah.

Professor Paul Freedman: Oh, you're putting me on the spot again? Geometry-- geometry, music, arithmetic, and astronomy. Right?

This is the period in which the Irish are critical to the preservation of learning. There was a book that was popular a few years ago called How the Irish Saved Civilization. Like many popular books, this is a little bit reducing things to a kind of easy formula. But it is Irish as well as Italian and very much English monasticism, under the influence of both Italy and Ireland, that has a program of establishing monasteries, correcting and preserving Latin, which has become increasingly distant from what people actually speak.

And of course, in Ireland, not part of the Roman Empire, they had no tradition of speaking Latin. The monks had to learn Latin as an artificial or completely foreign language. And in a way, that made their Latin better, because they didn't think that kind of on-the-way-to-French or on-the-way-to-Spanish language that was being spoken in general could be confused with Latin.

In the critical period, 550, end of the Gothic wars in Italy, devastation in Italy, to 750, beginning of the Carolingian ascent, there are only 264 books that survive. That is 264 manuscripts. And all but twenty-six of them deal with religious subjects. Of this twenty-six of them, eight deal with law, eight with medicine, six with grammar.

Now, one reason that very little survives is that these were mostly written on papyrus scrolls, which is not very durable. Though there is a change underway from about 400 AD to writing on parchment, which is very durable. And accordingly, along with this change to parchment is a change from the scroll to the codex. So the triumph of the codex is roughly 400 AD to 2010. We're going back to the scroll, actually. We even use the word for the process of going through a document on a computer or a Kindle.

How big are these libraries? How many texts do they have? The largest library before Charlemagne's ascent would have been the two libraries associated with the-- in the north of England. And perhaps one hundred books, 120. But it's at this setting, the England of Bede, the early eighth century, that we start to have the monasteries that really conform to our image of monks diligently copying manuscripts. The invention of what's called the monastic scriptorium, a place for writing.

So there are monks who not only read, but copy other books, maybe borrowed from other monasteries, too. This is a laborious process and one that we can follow, because we tend to know where our texts of classical learning come from, and by how slender a thread they arrive for us.

The monks would copy these documents. They would be preserved in the library. But again, these monasteries close, are plundered. The wanderings of these manuscripts then increase the fragility of what exists and what we now. Yeah?

Student: How do monks in Northumbria get a hold of texts that's mainly from libraries and external¡­

Professor Paul Freedman: The question is how do these monks in far off Northeastern England get a hold of the classical texts? They're brought up with the missionaries. There are evidence of constant communication with Italy, which is probably the source of most of them. And they'd learned very quickly-- remember, I said that there is this magnificent codex of the Bible that's now in Florence, that was a gift of the English to the Pope in the eighth century. So there is traffic in these extremely precious objects. But it's very small scale and very fragile, as I've said, until Charlemagne.

Chapter 3: Charlemagne¡¯s Program [00:20:57]

What Charlemagne does is not so much innovate or invent a program, as make it into something that's not just in artisanal enterprise dependent on a few monks in a few monasteries. And it's part of what we've said is a campaign to salvage classical learning.

This is encapsulated in one of Charlemagne's governing instructions to his administrative cadres. He says, "we are concerned to restore with diligent zeal the workshops of knowledge, which, through the negligence of our ancestors, have been well-nigh deserted. We invite others by our own example as much as lies within our power to learn to practice the liberal arts."

As Wickham points out, this is an unusual period of intellectuals participating in, and even to some extent, directing government. It's always necessary for governments to have some economists or foreign policy specialists. But intellectuals in the sense of promoting a program of liberal arts is unusual. Or intellectuals who are not just decorators, ornamentors, people who do nice, illuminated manuscripts, or beautiful fountains out of silver with chirping birds.

The court of Charlemagne is a moment of intense intellectual effort. And Charlemagne and his successors were rulers who gave tremendous power, privileges, even wealth, to people who knew something about classical learning. The purpose of this is to standardize education in the Church and to make sure that the Church ran in an effective manner. And also to make sure that the government ran in an effective manner.

By effective, I mean uniformity and discipline. So that you could go into a church in Barcelona, the southwestern corner of Charlemagne's realm, or in Aachen at the court of Charlemagne, or in Rome itself, and hear the same kind of liturgy or ceremony or ritual. That from one corner the Empire to the other, the church laws would be the same. That the discipline meted out to misbehaving priests would be the same. That preaching and missionary work would be coordinated and uniform. Even that spelling and the shape of the letters might be standardized. It is to Charlemagne and these intellectuals that we owe the very beautiful way that we write. As you can see, my minuscule print is the product of a monastic education.

These little letters, right? These minuscule letters are Carolingian. This is how they write. In the Roman era, they tend to write in a different fashion. And in the Merovingian court, Visigothic courts, in a still different and quite difficult to read-- at least for us now-- fashion. The spelling of Latin is regularized at this time. The notion is that the people would receive basic education. And of course, there's some debate as to how wide a spectrum of the populace this involved. How much education ordinary people were to receive.

But from the point of view of the intellectuals fashioning this, what was really important was that the clergy receive a good Latin education. The problem of clerical literacy is a persistent problem of the Middle Ages. Clergy, who may know some formula to recite, who don't actually know how to read, or who don't actually know what the Latin words mean.

So this is a program not just to save texts, but to use them, to apply them. And also to apply them to a level below that of intellectuals sitting around and discussing the ancient world. At the highest level, monastic centers collected and copied Latin classical manuscripts. Collected, commented, collated. This is not an intellectual program that aims at entrepreneurship or intellectuality in the sense of innovation.

Wickham talks about Amalarius of Metz, one of the people I didn't put on here. Amalarius, remember, is condemned for certain liturgical innovations. And he's astounded at being accused of innovating. He acknowledges that this is not his job, although he makes it worse by saying that he had found truth within his own spirit. Saying "I've found truth within my own spirit" in 840 AD is not a proper answer, because that makes it sound as if your spirit determines what truth is. Whereas truth is determined by a much longer, biblical, classical tradition. And that's what orthodoxy is. So he sort of had to accept his not incredibly severe punishment, but punishment nonetheless.

The Carolingian Renaissance was organized by a group of people who are from all over the place. Theodulph of Orleans is probably a Visigoth. Paul the Deacon is probably a Lombard. Einhard is a Frank. The greatest of these figures, Alcuin, who was more specifically commissioned by Charlemagne to-- and Alcuin's dates are 730 ¨C 804. Alcuin is from Northumbria. Alcuin is from the school established by Bede.

These scholars, as you can see, have different areas of specialization. Their enterprises, or their duties, were to regularize liturgy, to revive rhetoric, moral theology, logical argumentation, poetry, and to argue against theological unorthodoxy. The two theological problems of the Carolingian Empire were iconoclasm -- debates about that, which we've already seen in the Byzantine Empire -- and a heresy called "Adoptionism". Adoptionism is the notion that Christ was a human who was essentially adopted by God to become his son. It's a heresy that, at the time of Charlemagne, was strong in Spain, or at least defined as a heresy and wiped out.

We said that there are twenty-six non-religious manuscripts from between 550 and 750. For the ninth century, there are 290 classical manuscripts; 150 for the tenth century. So you can see that the ninth century is kind of a golden age of this. Although again, we're not talking about an incredible number of things. Not an incredible number, but they're very, very important.

Many of you have taken Directed Studies -- first year, freshman liberal arts, great books program. Well of course, DS doesn't like the Middle Ages for a number of reasons. So it's not as if DS decided that Lupus of Ferrieres is up there with Plato and Thucydides, but the things that you do read in DS include Polybius's history of the Roman Empire, Livy's history of the Roman Republic, Tacitus.

Polybius, Livy, and Tacitus are authors who depend basically on one manuscript. And that manuscript is a Carolingian manuscript. For Livy, for example, there's a lot of his incredibly long history that we don't have. The so-called lost decades of Livy. Livy's work is divided into books called decades.

The fact that we have as much of Livy as we do is due to the Carolingian copying program. The fact that we have Tacitus at all is due basically to one manuscript. Cicero's Republic, rediscovered in the nineteenth century, is a palimpsest. And you'll have heard in section-- and in the Beinecke tour, a palimpsest is a manuscript that has been scraped of its old text, a new text put on. But the old text is usually more interesting to us than the new one and can be restored and read.

Most of these are regarded as discoveries of the Renaissance. But where the Renaissance scholars found them was in northern monasteries, where they had been copied and kept since Carolingian times. Where then, did the Carolingians get their manuscripts? Where did they get the things to copy? Which is really a version of the very perceptive question that was asked before. Italy, for the most part, especially Ravenna, Monte Casino, and Rome itself.

So, for example, the German Monastery of Lorsch obtained from Italy an ancient manuscript of Virgil and copied it. They also have, or copied, Livy's fifth decade-- that is part of Livy's Roman history-- the unique manuscript of the fifth decade, found in the Renaissance at Lorsch. Copied at Lorsch in the ninth century from some papyrus Italian original, long since lost.

In addition to Lorsch, the centers of learning include Aachen itself, the court of Charlemagne, Corbie,-- C-O-R-B-I-E-- Tours,-- T-O-U-R-S-- St. Gall,-- Saint-- S-T Gall, G-A-L-L. And these libraries, we can see their growth during this period. So, for example, the Monastery of Reichenau, on an island in Lake Constance. In 800, the year that Charlemagne was crowned as emperor, Reichenau had fifty books. In 846, it had 1,000.

Well, all of this emphasis on education and classical learning is extremely important. And indeed, it merits those kinds of "How blank saved blank". "How the Carolingians saved classical civilization", in this case. But it does not mark a break with the piety and spirituality of the era. and. That's part of the point of the Einhard reading.

Chapter 4: Einhard¡¯s Life of Sts. Marcellinus and Peter [00:34:33]

Einhard is a critical figure in the court of Charlemagne, and of his son, Louis the Pious, about whom you'll be reading shortly, or have been reading. And in Einhard, we see an example of an intellectual of this period and of this place. Einhard is active in the court of Charlemagne. He would be one of Charlemagne's biographers, as we know, having read him.

He's also a monastic entrepreneur. I did say that this society doesn't encourage intellectual entrepreneurship in the sense of coming up with new ideas, but it's a very entrepreneurial society in the sense of getting saints, getting relics, establishing monasteries, becoming popular. It's a very competitive business environment.

And Einhard, as you've seen, was very good at this. He had several monasteries and churches under his jurisdiction. But his pet project, not that far from Frankfurt on the Main River, is Seligenstadt. And it's at Seligenstadt that eventually those relics of Saints Marcellinus and Peter come to rest. Note that the saints, Marcellinus and Peter, were acquired from Italy, just like the manuscripts. Because Italy is where there are an awful lot of saints from the Roman martyr period. There are even more saints, actually, in places like North Africa or Egypt, but they're tough to get at, because it's a long trip and they're Muslim.

Nevertheless, we know that lots of relics were liberated-- to use a rather 1970s term-- from Muslim captivity. Liberated -- and, of course, it's not as if Einhard, in talking about what is called the "translation" of relics, says that he bought them, or that he came by them, quote, honestly. Translation meaning here, the movement, the moving of the relics from one place to another.

Marcellinus and Peter were buried in Rome and in a church. And Einhard's agents negotiate with this dubious kind of character, who maybe can get them some relics and maybe not. And maybe it will require more money, or he's got to talk to a couple of guys. And it's this intrigue. And that's part of the story. The implication is that Marcellinus and Peter want to move. They let their tombs be found.

Remember that in looking for St. Tiberius, it's too heavy to lift the altar up. They can't do it. On the other hand, with these saints, no problem. And once they come to Seligenstadt, they perform all these miracles, which shows they're happy there. Sure, they were stolen. And in fact, as Wickham remarks, and as you've read, Hilduin, a competitor of Einhard's, had stolen some of Saint Marcellinus. And Einhard got him to return it, pressured him to return it. And eventually, Hilduin was disgraced. And I can't remember if he's executed or merely exiled. But this is a tough business.

So in 827, these relics get moved. Let me read you, since this is in a part of the Einhard book that we didn't assign. Let me just-- Yeah. It begins on page 69, if you're interested in following this. And they even have the itinerary of the relics.

So "after a fast of three days, they" -- his emissaries-- "traveled by night to that place without any Roman citizens noticing them. Once in the Church of St. Tiburtius, they first tried to open the altar under which it was believed his holy body was located, but the strenuous nature of the job they had started foiled their plan, for the monument was constructed of extremely hard marble and easily resisted the bare hands of those trying to open it. Therefore, they abandoned the tomb of that martyr and descended to the tomb of the blessed Marcellinus and Peter. There, once they had called on our Lord, Jesus Christ, and adored the holy martyrs, they were able to lift the tombstone from its place covering the top of the sepulcher."

Then they take it; they wrap them in a clean linen shroud. They take just St. Marcellinus, and they wrap him in a shroud. And then they put the tombstone back in place, quote, "so that no trace of the body's removal would remain." But then, just as they're about to make their escape, the deacon, one of this group, says, "Oh, my God, we can't leave without Saint Peter. These two were companions in life. We can't just take one of these bodies. We have to go back and take the other one."

They go back, and they get the body. So this is an adventure story. But it's a sacred adventure and it involves the relics of people who still have some say in where they want to be. The very special dead, as Peter Brown refers to them. And what's very special about them is that they're not exactly what you would normally call "dead". Their relics are very much active.

Now, we read in the series of miracles performed by these saints, along with another saint they picked up, Hermes, various medical cures. Notice that these miracles, unlike Gregory of Tours, are pretty exclusively in one category. Gregory of Tours has a lot of what might be called "scoffers punished" miracles. Somebody either tries to fake a miracle, and then is the victim of a real one. Or somebody tries to defy the bishop. Or somebody doubts the efficacy of the saint.

In this case, most of these miracles, almost all of them, are people with paralysis, disease of the bowels, horrible sores, blindness. Where to start? How great are these? I know you could not put this down. And I hope you read it to your molecular biology roommates just to show how great this is. I think I have this in the wrong place.

Anyway, remember the curing of the angry humpback? These guys are carrying the relics to Seligenstadt, and they stop to rest in a field. And this angry peasant with a pitchfork wants to chase them away. He also has a humpback. And they show him the relics and say what they're doing. And he falls to his face in adoration. He is cured of his afflictions. And the people of the village insist that the emissaries stay with them, have a kind of party all night, bring other villagers in.

This is an interesting moment. And I mention it because here, the piety of a person like Einhard is the same as the piety of the villagers. The Carolingian Renaissance is mostly about an elite program to try to preserve elite forms of knowledge. True, it is an effort to educate the populace, but that is probably the least successful aspect of it.

The literacy rate in 875 was hardly any greater than it had been in 775, if you could do a statistical study, and it wasn't very high. But when it comes to the saints, and to the meaning of the supernatural in regular life, the most learned people have the same attitude as the villagers of this little story.

OK. So we've reached the height of the Carolingian Empire in two days. And then, our next discussion will be about its precipitous and, in many respects, unfortunate decline. That's what we'll talk about on Wednesday.

Lecture 21 - Crisis of the Carolingians [November 16, 2011]

Chapter 1: End of Charlemagne¡¯s Rule [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: So we're going to talk today, now, about Carolingian decline. It's not just that we're compressing lectures or in a hurry. The empire of Charlemagne is an empire that does not last that long. So when we say that it has certain flaws, like size, well, we already said that the Roman Empire had this flaw. We've already said that the Abbasid Caliphate has this flaw. But those empires are able to manage with this weakness for quite some time.

Part of the problem with the Carolingian Empire is its size. Part of it, however, as you will have read in the Fichtenau reading is its lack of infrastructure and economic development. Infrastructure in a sense of not just towns, roads, communications, but social infrastructure, the lack of an idea of obeying the state or obeying the ruler, and a tendency, therefore, to mix private and public interest, and to the benefit of the powerful. We'll talk more about that.

There are also external problems. The beginnings of the Viking invasion, which we will be talking about after the break, occur before Charlemagne's death in 814. Nevertheless, there's no sense hastening the signs of decline. We always can see signs of decline coming after. But Charlemagne's rule had been so successful, so full of accomplishments, he was a ruler such prestige, that even the difficult last ten years or so of his reign can't quite eclipse that.

In 801, there arrived an elephant at the court of Charlemagne, a gift from the caliph of Baghdad, Harun al-Rashid, the caliph who figures in the Arabian Nights entertainments. This is a link between two very powerful and very distant empires, the two of the three that we've described as, in some sense, heirs to the Roman classical empire and civilization. There was a tentative thought of, perhaps, an alliance between Baghdad and Aachen, the capital of Charlemagne's empire. At various times, there had been negotiations between Constantinople and Aachen discussing the possibility of an imperial marriage.

The Carolingian ruler was contemptuous of Byzantium because it was ruled by a woman, the Empress Irene, a rather exceptional figure. But neither the alliance with Byzantium, at least not at this point, and certainly not the more far-fetched alliance with Baghdad came to anything. The elephant was certainly the first one seen in Europe probably since Hannibal and his invasion of Italy. And how he got there, what the logistics of his transport were, how he got to Baghdad in the first place-- it's not as if they have elephants in the natural habitat of Iraq either. Nevertheless, here's this elephant who lives for about ten years.

One of the signs of things starting to unravel in the Carolingian Empire, so some historians say, is the death of Charlemagne's elephant, which Einhard talks about, actually, in his biography; that is, it is an event that's worth mentioning. But pets, they don't last forever. As someone who lost his cat within recent memory, you've just got to get over it. On the other hand, I can get another cat. And Charlemagne, presumably-- well, not presumably. We know he didn't get another elephant.

The high watermark of his reign seems to be the year 802. This is arbitrary, but this is shown by the energy of his quarrel with the Byzantine empress over his arrogating to himself the title of emperor. This is the first person in the West claiming to be emperor, and the Byzantine Empire doesn't like it.

By 802, he is done with his two campaigns: one in Spain, and the other in Saxony and the regions of the Danube. He had pacified the Saxons after a nearly twenty-year effort. And while he hadn't achieved his ambitions in Spain, he had seized territory in the northern part of what's now Catalonia.

He attempted to address the problem that I've just identified, namely the tendency of powerful people to take over and rule localities not as government servants, but as noble rulers. He, in order to combat that, tried to get every free man in his realm to swear an oath to him personally, that is to make sure that they understood that their prime loyalty had to be to the emperor and not to the count, duke, local ruler, bishop, whoever he was. And the instructions that he gave to the men sent out to try and to administer this oath show you some of his idea of rulership. We've talked about this already, but since it's a fairly complex idea, it's worth emphasizing.

In the instructions, it says, "Let each man keep himself in the sacred service of God, following the divine commandment and observing whatever promise he may have made fully, to the best of his understanding and powers. For the lord emperor cannot exercise his vigilance or powers of correction over every man." So the notion that the emperor is supposed to be responsible for people behaving themselves, is responsible for not just what we would call political order, or peace, but for the salvation of the people, for the spiritual as well as political health of the realm, is typically Carolingian, and, in a way, typically medieval. There's a sense of imperial responsibility before God for the behavior of the emperor's subjects.

But already, a few years later in 806, this idea has been weakened. In 806-- if you take a look at the first map that I've given out, we have a partition in 806, an agreement at a place called Thionville. I guess this is going to have to be spelled out, since we don't have chalk. T-H-I-O-N-V-I-L-L-E. And it's written on the first-- well, no it just says , proposed partition.

In 806, he came up with the idea of dividing his realm among his three children. His son Charles would get the north, his son Pepin would get Lombardy and Bavaria, and his son Louis would have Aquitaine. In this document, there's no mention of the imperial title, leading one to surmise that maybe he thought this title was just his personal accomplishment. Maybe he didn't really envisage the reestablishment of the Roman Empire in any kind of permanent way.

Here, we just have a kind of splitting up of land. Louis gets the southwest; Charles gets the lion's share, the heartlands of the Carolingian family, the parts of Germany that the Carolingians controlled and northern France; and Pepin gets Italy and the Alps. So here you have a contrast between 802, this grandiose imperial idea of unity, 806, just like the Merovingians, partitioning out the lands for the successors of Charlemagne.

Chapter 2: The Problems of Charlemagne¡¯s Empire [00:09:01]

Aachen is a long way from being another Byzantium - Constantinople, or another Baghdad. And in these capitularies, the documents that are issued by the court of instructions to the administrators, we do see, as Fichtenau emphasizes, a sense of unease and of problems. Again and again, the capitularies lament corruption, maladministration. They start to mention the Vikings as more than just a minor, mosquito-bite-level distraction.

But most of all, they emphasize usurpation of royal authority. Usurpation meaning, again, that the people, such as the counts or dukes or the nobles who are supposed to be servants of the crown, supposed to be his chief servants, are taking over for themselves things like taxes, revenues, the right of judgment, the right to punish people. And people are tending to look at them as their rulers.

The count of Flanders, the count of Barcelona, the duke of Aquitaine, these are people who are starting to think of themselves as potentially, at least, rulers who might transmit their office to their children. And it then is not an office, it's a possession, if you have a right of inheritance. In other words, I could transmit to my children my ten-year-old car, my silver butter dish, all of my treasured possessions, but I cannot transmit to them the professorship that I have. I can't just say, well, my eldest son is going to be a professor of medieval history at Yale, whether or not he has any interest in doing that, because I don't own the position. It's not my property. It is my office.

We're so familiar with this that we don't even think about what it would be like. Well, we actually do, because there are some things that people do tend to start to own that, originally, were not supposed to be that way. But in the medieval world, it is a problem to dislodge people from property, because most property is in land.

All Yale has to do is stop paying me, and I'm no longer benefiting from this office. On the other hand, if I had a castle across campus and stored some boiling pitch and some followers, naturally, some trusty drinking mates, and had this a little moat and bailey establishment right outside of Harkness, I could terrorize Yale and extort from it. That picture is not so far-fetched.

Where the picture is really not far-fetched is if you imagine Yale in ruins. People pasturing sheep on Cross Campus and wondering "God, what were those buildings, anyway? They're really huge. And all those funny little blackboards, whatever they were for." And then using WLH to build fortifications.

Why build a new castle on the lawn when you've got building materials that somebody else left for you? So WLH 117, 116, 115 are one person's fortress. And that auditorium at the other end is somebody else's. And here I'm getting a little bit ahead of myself, but this is what's going to happen once the Carolingian Empire dissolves, essentially.

When I say to people usurp or arrogate or make hereditary their possessions, I'm talking about something that sounds abstract. But if you think of it in terms of what it means to defy people, basically, you're talking about building castles. And this has to do with the nature of warfare. This is all a subject for the course that succeeds this one, but it has to do with the nature of warfare, in the sense that, once you have that castle, it's very hard to be dislodged from it. The advantage is with the defense. Catapults, trebuchets, all these interesting weapons, actually, both require an insane amount of mobilization and organization and are not as effective as artillery some centuries later is going to be.

So the problems of Charlemagne¡¯s empire-- despite the invasions that will be our subject for Monday after Thanksgiving -- the problems of Charlemagne's empire are essentially internal, as was the case of the Roman Empire, only more so. These internal problems, what I've called the lack of infrastructure, which means political and economic infrastructure, make it very difficult, effectively, to resist the Vikings. And there are other invaders whom we'll have to mention as well, later on, the Hungarians and invaders and raiders from North Africa.

The empire was too large, given the nature of communications and the mechanisms available to impose order. The same thing that made it an empire made it have some disadvantages: diversity of population, ethnic loyalties. So you have revolts of Aquitainians who are not Franks; of Bretons, people of Britanny, who are not Franks; Bavarians; Visigoths. All of these people are not necessarily overjoyed with Frankish rule, not necessarily immune from the possibility of seizing on the weakness of the Franks to rebel.

Chapter 3: The reign of Louis the Pious [00:15:39]

These problems become more manifest in the reign of Charlemagne's son, Louis the Pious, who rules from 814 to 840. My hesitation in using the word rules is that he is deposed once and forced to undergo public penance twice.

One of the problems of the empire was obviated, however. When Charlemagne died in 814, the succession was just to Louis because his brothers had died. So the 806 deal, or 806 plan, was not implemented and became moot. Charlemagne was succeeded by one sole ruler over the entire empire, Louis the Pious, because Pepin and Charles had died.

Louis is often seen as inept but well-meaning. His sobriquet-- and a lot of the Carolingian rulers now have less-flattering than Pious Charles the Bald, well, that seems a little unfair. Charles the Simple, Charles the Fat, Louis the Stammerer, Louis the Child. You get the idea. Not an imposing group of rulers. But pious, shouldn't pious be a complement? And indeed, it could be.

And, as it happens, he's not known as Louis the Pious in every language. So in German, he's referred to as Louis the Pious, but in French, he's Louis the Debonair, the Imposing.

He is an imposing figure, actually. He's not as weak as what I'm going to say in the rest of the discussion about him is going to make him look. He was a very effective general. He did a lot of wars in southern France. He was the effective ruler of Aquitaine. He conquered Barcelona for Charlemagne.

He suffered from three problems, however. One not at all of his own making, the second certainly exacerbated by his vacillation, and the third is just who he was. The first problem is the invasions. The Viking invasions, in particular, begin during his reign, first part of the ninth century. So it's an external problem. On the other hand, the lack of an effective response does have to do with flaws in the nature of Carolingian rule, flaws in the nature of Louis' rule, in particular.

The second problem is his sons. His sons fought against each other and against their father. This is not something that's new to us. We've seen this with the Merovingians. But in order to maintain control of sons who expect some kind of rulership and who are jockeying for power with their siblings, Louis made it worse, in part, because he had sons by two marriages and tried to carve out another realm for his youngest son, Charles the Bald, Charles the future the Bald. I don't know that he was called Charles the Bald when he was fourteen. I actually don't know when that title starts to come into effect. Not title, nickname.

As we'll see, these civil wars have greater significance than mere civil wars, because they're at the origins of the breaking up of the empire into entities that we can just about start to call France and Germany. So we're at the kind of crucible, or moment of creation, of the European order that will exist for the next more than 1,000 years.

Louis had very sophisticated ideas about imperial rule. Perhaps even more sophisticated than those of his father, because Louis was quite a bit more educated than Charlemagne, quite literate, one might almost say an intellectual as well as an effective general. But he was less pragmatic, less realistic, less flexible than his father.

Even more than Charlemagne, Louis believed that the emperor must answer before God for the conduct of his population. Even more than Charlemagne, he believed that he ruled over a sanctified state. In other words, he was not just a political ruler, he was, in some sense, a religious leader that the religious and the political were not to be distinguished.

If the state is a religious entity, does it mean that the state rules over the Church? Or if it's a religious entity, perhaps it means that the Church rules over the state? It can go either way.

When Charlemagne was crowned by the pope, he certainly indicated a conception of rulership sanctified by the Church. He was not at all worried about the pope dictating to him. He had rescued the pope from the Roman mob. The pope was utterly dependent on him.

But that is not necessarily the way things would be. And Louis had less to worry about from the popes than from his own bishops. Taking his rulership as a sacred trust seriously meant that, in 822, he appeared at a place called Attigny. A-T-T-I-G-N-Y, Attigny. In the Church of Attigny, covered with ashes and dressed in sack cloth, which the Bible describes, and which, I guess, burlap would be the best modern equivalent, so dressed in rags, literally, covered with ashes to ask forgiveness for the way in which the rebellion of his nephew, Bernard, had been suppressed.

Not only were his son's restless, but his nephew had rebelled, been captured, been blinded, and died. The blinding -- maybe they knew how to do it better in Byzantium -- was supposed to be a more humane alternative, rendering him unfit to rule but sparing his life. But, in the end, he died.

Louis was full of remorse for this and did a public act of penance. And we know from the experience of all forms of leadership, including modern, that there are ways of saying you're sorry and ways of not saying you're sorry. The problem with a political officer or ruler saying they are sorry is that it may make them look weak. It may make them lose their aura of leadership. The problem with them not saying they're sorry, in the modern world, of course, is also very great. And it's very tricky to negotiate a line that preserves command but also gives, at least, the impression of candor.

Louis does not have Charlemagne's instinctive charisma of leadership. The penance at Attigny resulted in his loss of prestige and a great increase in the power of the Church. So there had always been an implicit danger of this, once Frankish and Christian ideas of rulership were merged. Charlemagne, as I've said, had no problem with this, but Louis did.

Already in 829, Pope Gregory IV would claim, ¡°is not the authority over souls, which belongs to the pope, above the imperial rule, which is of this world?¡± The implication here is that because the spiritual is superior to the material, in moral terms. And why is the spiritual superior to the material? This is a sort of Plato's Republic kind of question. I'm just saying this-- Yes?

Student: It's morality over the pressures of lust or something like that.

Professor Paul Freedman: And not merely morality over the pleasures of lust. What's the problem with the pleasures of lust, from the killjoy, Plato's Republic point of view?

Student: They end.

Professor Paul Freedman: They end. Right. They end. They are mortal. They die. And so is all matter, by definition. All matter fades.

So which is superior, the spiritual or the material? The spiritual doesn't die. The spiritual is immortal. That's what makes it spiritual. That's what the Forms, or reality, or the higher, the invisible, invisible-but-real.

To put ourselves in the mindset of 829, of course we have to admit that. You may not feel that. I'm not urging this upon you as a worldview. You may think that there is no such thing as the spiritual. Or you may think that the spiritual is as mortal as the material.

But in 829, people would agree, "Yeah, OK, the spiritual is superior to the material, because it's immortal and the material withers and dies." But does that mean that the spiritual has got to rule the material? That's the question for the ages, at least for the medieval ages.

So Louis the Pious and his sons. In 817, Louis issues an order, map number B, to divvy up the realm in the event of his death, an order called the ordinatio imperii, the ordering of the empire. This, unlike Charlemagne's division, really expresses an idea of imperial rule. Louis associates with himself his eldest son, Lothar.

And look at how big their territory is. First of all, it's huge. It encompasses the Carolingian ancestral lands. And basically, the other sons, Louis the German, Bernard, and Pepin, are given a bunch of adjunct lands.

And in fact-- I'm sorry. Bernard is not his son. It's his nephew. And this is what Bernard rebels against-- the rebellion that will cause his blinding and death-- is this, what he regarded as a few crumbs from the table, rather than a full share. The real problem begins, however, even after Attigny in 825 when Louis' second wife gave birth to a son named Charles, thus complicating the succession. His second wife, Judith, urged him to fit Charles into the succession, and this enraged the older sons from his first marriage.

In a 829, a council met at Paris. And while Charles was given a share, the bishops of the realm also claimed a right to judge the king by his performance. In 831, a rebellion, a second or third rebellion, broke out. The sons of Louis the Pious, although fighting against each other, allied. The Church regarded Louis, now, as hopelessly ineffectual, incapable of bringing order to the realm. And Louis was captured by his sons, forced to abdicate both by the Church and by Lothar and Louis, his older sons.

Lothar was so arrogant, however, that by 834 Louis had been restored. I won't go into the complexities of this. Suffice it to say that the hapless, or at least unlucky, Louis the Pious, when he died in 840, provoked another war of succession among his sons. Keep in mind that, meanwhile, the administration of the empire is dissolving, and the Viking invasions are occupying ever more attention, ineffectual attention, and plundering even more.

Chapter 4: The Treaty of Verdun and its Consequences [00:29:27]

After a series of battles and campaigns, in 843, a third partition took place. But this one is really important. This is the Treaty of Verdun, V-E-R-D-U-N. And that's the third one on your map that I have bold or, at least, felt-tipped lines showing the division. And then, on page two of the handout, on the upper part, is the division of Verdun.

The Treaty of Verdun divided the empire among the three sons of Louis the Pious, three surviving sons. The western part went to Charles the Bald. And you see that in white, Neustria, Aquitaine, Spanish March. It is what can start to be called France.

The eastern part, which is the darkest-- Saxony, eastern Austrasia, Alemania, Bavaria-- went to Louis' son, Louis, also named Louis -- Louis the German, as he's known to historians. And he's known as Louis the German in part because his sphere of influence was the East, which we can start to call Germany.

The eldest son, Lothar, got the middle part, which stretches from what's now the northern part of the Netherlands, Frisia, all the way down to Rome, and even a little south of Rome, Spoleto. This is the most prestigious and, in some ways, richest part of the Empire. It has Aachen, the imperial capital, and it has Rome, the old imperial capital. It has the lands of the Carolingians, most of them, in the region of Aachen, in the region of the Low Countries, modern Belgium.

What's the problem with this realm? Or what's the obvious military, political problems? Spence?

Student: The shape would be exceedingly hard to defend.

Professor Paul Freedman: It would be very hard to defend. It would be easy to cut off and invade. And if we say that the western part is France and we say that the eastern part is Germany, using these terms anachronistically but not inaccurately, what is the middle part?

The middle part is all that part of Europe that has been fought over. All of World War I [correction: that] takes place on the Western Front. Most of it takes place in the northern part of realm of Lothar.

The places where, like Belgium, which this day, now, is bitterly divided between French-speaking and Flemish-speaking. In other words, people who speak a Germanic language, descended from some ancestral Germanic language, and those who speak French, descended from Latin. That line runs right through Belgium.

And the same ambiguity pursues this whole realm of Lothar's down into Switzerland, a modern polity-- well, modern, late medieval and modern-- where they speak four official languages and are so unsure about which is the official one that their stamps give the name of the country in Latin and their airline gives its name in English. Their stamps call themselves Helvetia. There has not been an entity called that, really, in real life terms, since the Roman Empire. But that's better than having all four language on there. It's more convenient.

So there's a linguistic ambiguity, there's a cultural ambiguity, and there's a political ambiguity. Because, of course, the realm of Lothar didn't hold up very long. Its strategic flaw was very quickly manifested. It was divided, but never permanently.

Part of this realm would be called what in French is Lorraine but in German is called Lothringen. Lothringen named after Lothar, L-O-T-H-R-I-N-G-E-N. Alsace and Lorraine, these two provinces, are now France. In 1870, they were taken by Germany. After World War I, they were taken back by France. Under Hitler, they became annexed to Germany. After World War II, they're back with France. A substantial proportion of the population of Alsace still speaks German. And until about the seventy, eighty years ago, a fairly significant proportion of Lorraine did as well.

The same kind of ambiguity as to what are these territories. And in our world, they either are neither France nor Germany-- hence, Belgium, Netherlands, Switzerland-- or they've traded hands. It is not exactly accurate to say that the political, military history of Europe since 843 is simply the unwinding of the consequences of the Treaty of Verdun. But it's not completely inaccurate to say that either. That doesn't mean that events like the Reformation or the second world war don't have significance well beyond that. But just in terms of border shifting and maps of Europe, the legacy of Verdun is tremendous. If the legacy of Charlemagne is, in some sense, the creation of a cultural realm that can be referred to as Europe, the legacy of the sons of Louis the Pious is the ambiguous division of that realm.

What this really means, then, in ninth century terms-- since nobody said, wow, we're signing the Treaty of Verdun. This is going to have consequences for centuries-- the immediate consequences were the decreasing relevance, the decreasing importance, of the imperial title. When Lothar died and his eldest son died soon after, Lothar's realm was divided between Louis and Charles. Then, Italy was left to a son of Lothar's called Louis the Second. He took on the imperial title.

But under Charles the Bald, the third and much youngest son of Louis the Pious, for a little while the Empire was reunited. For a little while meaning, basically, two years. When Charles died in 877, the Empire would not be reestablished as unified for almost a century. And when it was, it would really consist of, basically, an enlarged Germany and a portion of Italy, not France.

And Charles, although he bore, between 875 and 877, the grand title of emperor and was unchallenged within his own family, his rulership was already severely undermined by the intrigues of his nobles and the Vikings. By the time of his death, many of the counties that had originally been administrative divisions of the Empire has become almost independent. So for example, Barcelona, conquered by Louis the Pious, was now ruled after 868 by a count who paid nominal allegiance to the ruler of the western kingdom, but who was the founder of a dynasty.

Up to 868, therefore, you have counts of Barcelona who are appointed by the ruler. After 868, the ruler has very little to do with it. It is a local ruler. And the count is no longer an office holder, but a ruler in his own right. Similar with Aquitaine. Similar with Bavaria. Similar with Poitou, Toulouse, Flanders. The reason that the counts are able to do this is the weakness of the central power, not only because of the personality of the ruler, but because of the inadequate nature of the administration.

When Charles died, he was succeeded by several rulers in the West: Louis the Stammerer; Louis the Third, who had the good fortune of just being Louis the Third; and Carloman. In Germany, the ruler was Charles the Fat. And he was elected is emperor for, again, four years, but was pretty utterly ineffectual.

And not because he was fat, I hasten to add. The Middle Ages did not share our prejudices in this regard. So Louis the Fat, in the twelfth century, was a very effective king. Fat or not, Charles, this particular Charles was not an effective ruler.

Chapter 5: Conclusion: The Dissolution of Carolingian Authority [00:40:04]

All of these rulers, as I said, suffered the depredations of the Vikings. But once again, I want to emphasize that the problems of this empire, or the problems of these separate kingdoms, or, indeed, the problems of some of the counties ruled by independent counts but affected by the Vikings and other invaders, were internal. The Vikings were opportunistic raiders, not the cause of the dissolution of authority.

The dissolution of authority didn't mean that the Carolingians come to an end. Because by this time, in the late ninth century, they have some of the prestige that the Merovingians had in their decline. In their veins flowed the blood of Charlemagne. They were a sacred dynasty. They had a certain kind of prestige. So for example, they would be kings of France, with some minor interruption, until 987.

In Germany, the family ends in 911, and a new series of dynasties comes into effect. In 987, a new dynasty comes into rule of France called the Capetian dynasty, C-A-P-E-T-I-A-N, which technically runs out in 1314, fourteen but which is related to the French kings since. And indeed, when Louis the XVI was guillotined by the French Revolution, he was referred to in the court documents as ¡°Louis Capet.¡± In other words, they gave him a kind of artificial last name and regard him as descended from this ruler Hugh Capet, C-A-P-E-T. Thus, a member of the Capetian, C-A-P-E-T-I-A-N, dynasty.

But the reality of France, and even of Germany, in the 10th century would be as a series of nearly independent principalities feuding, only nominally controlled by the kings. The ruler, Hugh Capet, who succeeded in 987, basically, he seems to have controlled the road between Paris and Orl¨¦ans. But in places that are now public parks in Paris, like Vincennes, there were castles not loyal to the king at all.

So my little fantasy of a fortified Cross Campus is not so far-fetched, at least not so far-fetched in terms of what really happened in places like Paris, and indeed in, for example, the city of Arles in southern France, there's a wonderfully preserved Roman stadium, Roman sports arena that was fortified. That is, one family had the bleachers and fought against the people who had the boxes behind home plate. Not a classical term, but behind what might have been considered home plate, anachronistically.

And indeed, there are towers built on top of this structure that were then demolished, because they were medieval and not classical. But they made use of these materials. So we have a society in which the power of the ruler has literally dissolved. Not dissolved into water, but certainly crumble into much smaller components.

Those components being, essentially, a castle, or a few castles, the territory around it, the right to exploit the peasants around it. Maybe you would have an effective regional ruler, like the Count of Barcelona or the Count of Flanders, who would tie to himself these castellans, the people who own or run the castle. But it is a society that has become fragmented.

It's not a barbarian society. These are not nomads. They're violent, but then again, lots of societies run on violence. It's a controlled kind of violence. They want to squeeze the peasants, even occasionally, perhaps, plunder them. They don't want to have them go away or exterminate them, because they don't have any wealth otherwise.

It is an exploitative society. But that, again, is not entirely new or entirely unknown in other historical periods and places. What it does bring up, however, and which I'll try to address in our last class once we've talked about the Vikings, is what's been accomplished. Here we are, from 300 AD to the year 1000, and we're still talking about invasions. And we're still talking about polities falling apart because they're too large. We're still talking about the lack of administrative control over powerful individuals.

So I promise you that something was accomplished. And I will try to describe that next time. But you're forgiven for thinking that that, perhaps, we have wandered around and not come very far. Have a very good Thanksgiving, and I'll see you soon.

Lecture 22 - Vikings / The European Prospect, 1000 [November 28, 2011]

Chapter 1: Introduction [00:00:00]

Professor Paul Freedman: It does seem as if we are back to invasions again. We end the course the way we began it, except they're different invaders.

One thing that I'm sure Professor Frank will want you to get out of the Vikings course-- and not all of you are going to take that, obviously, so I will mention this-- is they did not have horned helmets. The horned helmet idea-- actually, Roberta Frank has researched where this totally inaccurate idea comes from and why it is ineradicable. But if there's one thing you should come out of the second part of this course knowing, it's that.

So we're discussing people from Scandinavia, different parts of Scandinavia, who had different destinations. So different parts of Scandinavia: Denmark, Norway, Sweden. Different destinations: the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne for which they bear some responsibility for unraveling, Russia, the British Isles, Iceland, Greenland, the New World. They certainly got around. They're not always the same populations. And they have different ambitions in different places.

Basically, those ambitions can be divided into raiding, trading, and settling. These are not mutually exclusive. Although usually they began by raiding almost always if they were dealing with a place that had people. Thus obviously Iceland when they came didn't have people at all. So they came there as explorers or settlers.

The crucial changeover is in their attacks on the British Isles and on the Frankish Empire. They begin as raiders, that is as seaborne warriors who would plunder opportunistic targets-- monasteries, for example-- and then leave with their spoils.

They also, however, were traders. And I don't want to make too much of this as if it were a timeless statement, but in the period we're dealing with, raiding and trading weren't all that far apart. When the Vikings in the east, mostly from Sweden, were dealing with the Caliphate in Baghdad or the Byzantine Empire, they found these targets too well organized with too overpowering a military presence to intimidate in the way that they were able to do with Britain and the Frankish Empire. So here they were more traders.

They brought various products, particularly slaves and fur, to the Caliphate and to the Byzantine Empire. And they came back with a lot of coins, among other things. 80,000 coins from the Caliphate have been found in Sweden alone. So here they're traders.

Settlers. They would eventually settle in the Frankish Empire and in the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of England. They would settle in Ireland. Indeed, the city of Dublin was founded by the Vikings. They would settle in Iceland completely. That is, the people who live in Iceland now are the descendants of mostly Norwegian, some Danish settlers of the tenth and eleventh centuries.

They would even try to settle as far afield as Newfoundland. There is a place in Newfoundland that it is unmistakably, by the archaeological evidence, a Viking site. This doesn't ultimately work.

So it is wrong to think of them exclusively as savage warriors, as barbarians, but then again, we've seen that it's wrong to think of most of the invading peoples of the period we've been discussing as just totally savage raiders. These are extremely skilled raiders, and as I've just gotten through saying, they're raiders with several different possible agendas. They're very adaptive.

The question remains, what made Scandinavia so powerful in the ninth and tenth centuries, especially since Scandinavia tends not to be a major actor in European politics. The two periods in which it is are this one-- basically the ninth, tenth, eleventh centuries-- and the seventeenth century when the armies of Sweden under Gustavus Adolphus terrorized Central Europe. That effort was ultimately ended not in Central Europe but in Eastern Europe by Russia. And the Russians defeated the Swedes sufficiently in the early eighteenth so that they basically never got themselves very heavily involved in European politics again.

Part of the answer of "Why Scandinavia? Why now?" is that we're dealing with another savage or certainly less civilized population who erupt from their homeland and devastate a weak, but relatively rich society. There's nothing very unusual about that. We have seen it with the Roman Empire, and you can see it later with such successful campaigns as those of the Mongols in the thirteenth century.

So the other reason besides opportunity is tactics. The Vikings were masters of the sea. If you ever do go to Denmark, Sweden, or Norway, you must go to the Viking museums there. They are absolutely enthralling. And you see these ships that seem unbelievably flimsy for the voyages that they undertook.

On the other hand, by reason of their small size and particularly shallow draft-- that is to say they're able to be stable without being so deep underneath the ship, having a keel underneath-- that they can sail up rivers. They can both, therefore, go in the Atlantic and be stable enough to make the journey and go up rivers that are no more than five or six feet deep at points like the Seine in France or the Loire in France. And so they could raid far inland with these ships.

And as masters of seas and rivers, they could easily outrun the clumsy, slow Carolingian armies. They could raid a monastery, check out another monastery the same afternoon. "Oh, there's an army there. Well, we'll just get back in the ship, and we'll go further down. And then we'll look for more tempting targets-- palaces, towns, monasteries."

They were not good at fortification. If a place was fortified, they tended to pass it by. They were not siege masters. Their control, therefore, of the water is not dissimilar to the Arabs' advantage in the beginning of the Arab expansion that we talked about with regard to the desert. The desert functions the same way. An environment that these people controlled in the sense that they could maneuver easily in it, and their more civilized opponent with larger armies could not.

The Persian and the Byzantine armies couldn't really go very far into the desert. They had supply line, water problems. They actually didn't know the desert. It all looked the same to them. So this is the same or at least a similar advantage for the Vikings.

The Vikings are different from other raiders partly in their ability to construct governments, not only to settle lands, but to create governments ranging from the what advertises itself with some accuracy as the world's oldest democracy, Iceland, where tourists are still pointed out the place where the kind of parliament of all citizens took place as early as 2,000 [correction: 1,000] years ago.

And they're also the founders of Russia, probably not to be advertised as the world's oldest democracy. Certainly not a country that's had a whole lot of experience with that particular form of government. But in fact, the first Christian rulers of Russia, the same Vladimir and his successors, who were baptized and crowned under Byzantine auspices were Scandinavian. And the Scandinavian groups are called the Rus. They quickly lose their Scandinavian language and identity, but nevertheless that is the founding dynasty of the first Russian rulers.

So the Vikings have a fascinating culture and literature, amazing sagas mostly preserved through their Icelandic versions, very interesting art, very interesting forms of decoration, and then these magnificent ships. Their major contribution to the history of Europe may be geopolitical in the sense that they connect parts of the world that were otherwise minimally or not at all connected. So from Central Asia to Greenland, they build various kinds of cultural and particularly commercial networks.

They also contribute to the destroying of the Carolingian Empire, the destroying of what we were discussing before the vacation. They're not the sole cause. We talked about weaknesses within the Carolingian Empire, but certainly the Viking invasions have devastated it during the ninth century ?did not at all help.

Where did this drive for expansion come from besides opportunity? And there's not a tremendous agreement on this point among scholars. Overpopulation and land hunger are possible. To this day, these are not densely populated countries. And in the pre-modern period, they could not support anything but a very small population given the fact that most of the land is not capable of being cultivated. So you can get to a point of over-population pretty quickly.

Opportunities afforded by the weakness of others-- I've mentioned this. Internal feuding and the creation of exiles. It's hard to separate legend from history, but the legends about the founding of Iceland and Greenland in particular involve people who were too rowdy for the Vikings. I pause on that, because it's a little hard to imagine what such a person would have been like. Nevertheless, these sagas tell us that various people were just too mean for quiet, civilized old Norway or even couldn't get their energies fulfilled by plundering the Frankish Empire and went off to Iceland and places like that.

The climate conditions may have been favorable. It may have been relatively warm. There's a lot of debate about the settlement of Greenland in this regard in particular. We know that by the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, Greenland was becoming too cold for the Scandinavians and not for the Inuit, who were better adapted to real polar conditions. But this is something that is of crucial importance in tracing the history of climate and is hotly debated. But it certainly looks as if it gets colder in the thirteenth, fourteenth century-- fourteenth century particularly-- throughout Europe and the Atlantic and probably warmer in the tenth and eleventh centuries when this expansion is taking place.

And then finally, there's a cult of personal valor that is even stronger than that of early medieval Europe. A male cult of violent military bravery and the opportunity to demonstrate that was a kind of competitive sport.

Chapter 2: The Vikings in England and on the Continent [00:13:52]

The Viking raids in England and the Continent begin around 800. One of the first stunning events is the sack of the island monastery of Lindisfarne on the eastern coast of northern England. The monastery of Lindisfarne was sacked by the Vikings in 797. Charlemagne was able to repulse these raids and the English as well. But the civil wars that we were talking about among the sons of Louis the Pious started to encourage the Vikings indirectly by the disunity of the Frankish Empire, the wasting of military resources on what was, in effect, a kind of civil war. But also the Vikings just got stronger and more ambitious, because their raids on relatively well-organized Britain start to reach their height in the 830s.

So you start having the abandonment of monasteries, for example, the abandonment of Lindisfarne and the moving of its relics. So the relics of Saint Cuthbert of York move around a lot. Monks on the western coast of France abandon their monasteries and move their communities and relics further inland.

The Vikings seem to jockey between emphasizing raids on the Frankish Empire and on England, but basically they're doing both. They start to spend the winter, what's called over-wintering in the late 830s, early 840s. And that's a sinister sign from the point of view of the English, Irish, and Franks, because that means that they're going from raiding to some form of settling. If they can spend the winter and not just the classic raiding season, why not just stay permanently?

So they start coming up the rivers. They start plundering cities that are not sufficiently fortified. A monk in the 860s writes, ¡°the number of ships grows every year...¡± The feeling of just this complete takeover. Now, that's the monastic point of view. The monasteries were ideal targets, because they are rich, isolated, and minimally fortified. But nevertheless, the Carolingians have no fleet to match the Viking ships.

The way to stop the Vikings-- and it was only really implemented in the 870s and 880s. The way to stop the Vikings was with fortified bridges. If you built a bridge that the Vikings could not go past without fighting and fortified it sufficiently and had sufficient numbers of troops, you would stymie them. And this is eventually what happens. In the late ninth century, the Vikings are defeated at the gates of Paris in 888-- 885, 886, rather.

And they start accommodating with the European rulers. That is to say they are given lands to settle and then made to promise to stop raiding. And in effect, they start to settle down towards the end of the ninth century, beginning of the tenth century so that, for example, a treaty in 911 with the West Frankish ruler, the ruler we can start to call the King of France, allows them to settle in northwestern France in a territory that henceforth was called Normandy. Same in French. Normandie. The territory of the "Northmen" is what they're usually referred to in the sources rather than ¡°Vikings¡±. The territory of the Northmen.

So Normandy in 911 was a province settled by Vikings nominally loyal to the King of France. The Vikings very quickly lose their language. By the time of the Duke of Normandy, William the Conqueror, 150 or so years later, they are Norman. They speak French. They are more French than anything else, although a bit different. Their ships still look a bit like Viking ships. If you know the Bayeux Tapestry, which is this embroidery that shows the history of the Norman conquest of England, their ships look very much like our image of Viking ships.

In England, the 860s are the zenith of their destruction. They actually in effect partition England between an eastern and a western part. The eastern part becomes a territory called the Danelaw, the place where the Danes have settled.

And their indirect effect on England is to force the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms to unify. So rather than the multiple kingdoms that we looked at at Bede's time-- Mercia, East Anglia, Northumbria-- we have the western kingdom formerly called Wessex, which under King Alfred in the 860s to 880s becomes really the sole Anglo-Saxon kingdom of England and gradually defeats the Vikings, eventually kicking them out of the British Isles altogether by about 930 or so.

So the conquests in the Frankish and English realms are not permanent in the sense that there's minimal Scandinavian impact of a permanent sort on these places. There are not a lot of people speaking Old Norse in either place in 1100. But their impact is tremendous in terms of organizing these places, creating networks, founding cities like Dublin, reorganizing kingdoms like Ireland, creating Normandy, and really kind of throwing the puzzle on the floor and reforming it.

Chapter 3: The Vikings in the East [00:21:05]

In the East and in the Atlantic. Here you have to imagine or sort of visualize Scandinavia sitting on the top of Europe. The same effect that encourages airlines to use polar routes as a shorter way to cross the globe also allows the Scandinavians in effect to choose their targets. Some of this is logical. Norway is much easier, much closer to the British Isles than you might think. It sort of sits on top of them. And Sweden is much closer to the East via the North than one would think.

But even Norway, for example, the modern kingdom of Norway, has a border with Russia. It goes so far north, and then it has this very little, narrow piece of land that is only about thirty miles from the important Russian port of Murmansk. And all of these places are relatively warm given how far north they are because of the Gulf Stream.

So just as London is surprisingly warm considering that it's on the same latitude as Newfoundland, so these northern parts of Scandinavia are the equivalent of polar wastes of northern Canada. And yet they are-- they're cold enough. The problem with them is they're really dark. So they're dark for months at a time, but they're not all that cold.

From this vantage point then, the East would be a tempting source of enterprise for Vikings, particularly but not exclusively from Scandinavia, especially in the tenth century. They would go via the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of Finland down the Russian rivers like the Dnieper-- Dnieper with a 'D'-- to the Black Sea and the Volga to the Caspian Sea.

They used to these rivers as ways of reaching territories of Byzantine and of Caliphal influence. They traded, raided when possible. A lot of our descriptions of the Vikings by outsiders, our most accurate descriptions, are from Muslim travelers who describe who these people are, what their products are even though very little remains in this region to attest to the Vikings. The main evidence, as we said, are really coins taken back to Scandinavia.

Their base-- that is the Viking base in this eastern area-- was what would become Kiev in modern Ukraine. And Kiev would be the first Russian Scandinavian kingdom ruled by a tsar. They had ambitions to take over Constantinople, a city they called in sort of Tolkien-esque fashion ¡°Mickelgard¡± -- "Gard" meaning city, "mickel" meaning powerful. "Mickel" still in Middle English, in Chaucer's English, means "impressive," "powerful."

Their attacks on Mickelgard didn't work. They attacked in 860 and 941, and we've seen that Constantinople was able to fight off more impressive enemies than this. They therefore were dealing with wealthy and established states, well-organized states, better organized than the Carolingian Empire or the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, and so states that were capable of defeating them. They therefore came to these areas controlled by Baghdad and Constantinople more as traders than as raiders.

What did they bring to trade with? They have certain classic products, things from the North Sea, like walrus ivory, very highly prized, amber from the Baltic Sea-- amber used in jewelry and medicine, a stone that's not really a stone, a thing that's much lighter than it looks like credited with various kinds of mysterious or at least medicinal properties throughout the formerly Roman and Islamic world. Arrows and swords. The West was very good at metalworking. Honey, hunting falcons, wax.

But as I said, their two great commodities were slaves and furs. Slaves-- these societies of the Byzantine Empire and the Caliphate always wanted more slaves. They had plenty of unpleasant labor as well as domestic service shortages. And so many of these slaves were Slavs, that is Slavic populations rounded up by the Vikings and then sold in Constantinople or Baghdad.

Furs. On the one hand, furs like sable, marten, mink that bounded in the eastern Baltic regions and in what's now northern Russia were tremendously prized in a world in which central heating was nonexistent. And although we may not think of modern Istanbul as particularly cold, it's quite cold and damp. One can certainly understand the practical desire for furs for well-off people in the Byzantine Empire.

In the Caliphate, it may seem a little stranger. Baghdad is more noted for unbearable heat than cold. On the other hand, the Caliphate includes territories like Afghanistan, eastern Iran. And also, keep in mind, as is the case with Palm Beach and Miami Beach even as we speak now in late November, that for certain people, the prestige of the furs transcends any need for practical warmth. So these are the two great products.

So they're plunderers and extortionists, but they're fairly creative plunderers and extortionists. They create a number of trading cities, not only Kiev further south, but the great city of Novgorod sort of between the Baltic and the more modern city of Moscow. These cities are fortified, leading one to assume that they weren't just free-trade zones, that other people raided them or that the Vikings expected other people to try to revenge themselves on their kind of raiding and trading. So anyway, as we've said before, trading and plundering are not necessarily totally distinct.

Chapter 4: The Vikings in the West [00:29:20]

So finally, the West. The Vikings begin to explore the Atlantic mostly from Norway and beginning after the maximum period of raiding of England starts to tail off in the 860s. These lands were uninhabited ¨C Iceland -- or minimally inhabited -- Greenland. They were very attractive for hunting and for pasturing.

Where the Vikings found a fair density of people, they tended not to stay. This is their problem with Newfoundland. They have a settlement in Newfoundland at a place whose modern name is somewhat confusing way called L'Anse aux Meadows. So you have a French and English compound. L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland, one of a number of certainly the most best-known Viking sites. But there were Native Americans who drove them out, not necessarily because they were superior in armament, but it just wasn't really worth it to the Vikings to stay. So their staying in Newfoundland is relatively brief.

In order to go from Norway to Iceland, it's about 800 miles, and it took anywhere between one week and one month. The island is not as cold as its name suggests. It has glaciers, but in the parts that don't have glaciers, it's not all that cold. Again, the Gulf Stream. Most of it is uninhabitable, but that's because of volcanic rock.

I don't know how many of you have been to Iceland, but even the drive from the airport to Reykjavik is intimidating, because it goes through the stuff called "tufa". And there are no trees, and there's sort of no prospect of anything growing there. But on the other hand, there are plenty of nice coastal strips, mild climate, great pasture.

There are almost no trees now. And there's a lot of debate about whether there were trees, whether they just cut them down, and they couldn't be re-cultivated. But in fact, this is a very hospitable place: rich pastures, sea mammals everywhere. Until Iceland completely lost its mind in the speculative atmosphere of the decade preceding 2008, their main industry was cod fishing. They then went into banking in a way that just staggers the mind and have gotten back into cod fishing, my understanding is.

But they had lots and lots of other things. Lots of seals which they killed for fur, walrus skin used for cable for ropes for ships, walrus ivory, another little creature called an narwhal that has a tusk that looks like a-- well, it was taken for being a unicorn tusk. There's one in the Cloisters, for example, that some of you are going to see on the seventh of December.

So the colonization of Iceland begins in 870, and by 930, the island is basically full. It's habitable land, again. A very, very small percentage of the land area was fully settled. We know a lot more about Iceland than any other part of Scandinavia because of the extraordinary quality and quantity of poetic stories, sagas in which honor, treasure, and love of mayhem dominate. These are very violent and until a certain point were taken to be realistic portrayals of life in Iceland just as if, say, 1950s and 1960s TV westerns were assumed to be a totally accurate portrayal of life everywhere in the United States in the nineteenth century. So these are, like Westerns, wonderful stories of male violence with a certain amount of exaggeration, but nevertheless the reflection of customs, ways of speaking, and social values.

Towards the end of the tenth century, Greenland was explored under the leadership of Erik the Red, one of these renegades so difficult and violent that he was exiled from both Norway and Iceland. He is the one who seems to have dubbed this new territory Greenland, a pioneer of deceptive advertising, I think it's fair to say. Because warm as it may have been in the tenth century, this is like calling some housing development Warbling Acres when in fact you've just bulldozed all the trees in order to create the development.

So the western coast of Greenland had rich pasture. The West is warmer than the East. Settlers came beginning in 986. There was even a bishopric established at a place called Gardar, another sort of Tolkien-esque name. We don't know very many bishops who actually went to Gardar. Most of them ruled from Denmark and sort of basically told their flock to get in touch with them if they needed them, gave them their office hours and had a phone that took messages.

But this settlement did not last. Greenland was more or less abandoned by 1400 and then would later be, in modern times, resettled, but this time by Denmark.

And then finally, Norwegians from Greenland settled what's now Labrador in Newfoundland, late tenth, early eleventh centuries. They even wrote a saga called the Vinland Saga. The Vinland Map that's in the Beinecke Library that purports to show both the Chinese Mongol Empire and the territories of Vinland in the New World is unfortunately a fake. But as I said, these archaeological finds in Markland, as the Vikings called Labrador, or Vinland, as they referred to Newfoundland, are real. They were settled about the year 1000 and abandoned in 1020.

Chapter 5: Conclusion: What¡¯s been accomplished? [00:37:09]

So here we are, 1020 or the year 1000. And I know that you will be asking what has been accomplished since we began with 284. And this is a fair question, because at first glance, it would seem as if we're still in a world of declining population, a rural society with very few urban centers, a society of relatively little literacy, relatively small amounts of commerce, lots of violence, lack of governmental order, militarized society, all developments that we have been tracing since the beginning. The optimistic take on this is that beginning with the material covered in the next course, there's a very rapid ascent from 1000 to about 1300, a tremendous growth of the European economy and a tremendous expansion of both population, artistic, political, and intellectual creativity that is the central period of the Middle Ages.

The real mystery behind this, the sort of historical problem, is what explains the domination of Europe in the second millennium AD? The first millennium, most of which we've covered in this course, the dominant areas are the Mediterranean at the beginning, which includes Europe, but also includes North Africa, Egypt, the Middle East, and modern Turkey. And indeed, those latter regions would outpace Europe, properly speaking. The first millennium is something of a catastrophe for Europe, at least by measurable statistics of a per capita GNP, population, population density, urbanization, nature.

What then explains the domination of Europe after 1000? In some ways, it's a slow process. The first European colonies don't really get established until the aftermath of Columbus' voyage in 1492. And then they get established incredibly rapidly and with surprisingly little effort, right? Mexico and Peru, these huge empires of the Aztecs, Mayans, and Incas fall to a few hundred Spanish troops. And the Spanish and Portuguese between 1492 and 1520 are all over the world, from Malacca in modern Malaysia to India to the Persian Gulf to Mexico and Peru.

Well, we don't have to explain that. That's for another time. But suffice it to say that already in 1095, the European Christian population is capable of putting together an army to conquer Jerusalem from Islam, a seemingly impossible job, and certainly one that required more than logistics and resources but also a certain kind of if not fanaticism at least a real motivation, religious motivation. But nevertheless, it is a sign of a certain kind of European power that one would not have thought in the year 1000 was possible.

In the year 1000, the smart money, the Brookings Institute, think tank, kind of RAND Corporation, Bain Consulting, all the smart people would have said, "Don't put any money into Europe. You've got to be kidding. The coming regions are the same as over the last couple hundred years. Maybe Byzantium, a cautious buy. Definitely the Islamic kingdoms, even if the Caliphate is having some problems, qua Caliphate, their successor state, Fatimid Egypt-- awesome, awesome. This is going to dominate for the next millennium. Our algorithms agree on this."

And all sorts of promising signs in Eastern Europe with the creation of Russia to your more prescient younger, hot-shottier consultants would have identified that. But Germany, Italy, France, the British Isles certainly would have seemed discouraging.

Yet there are some promising signs. As it turns out, the Vikings are the last invaders. The Vikings coincide with invasions from the Magyars. Magyars, that's what they call themselves to this day. They're known as the Hungarians to the outside world out of a confusion between them and the Huns. They actually have nothing to do with the Huns. But they were quite frightening land-based raiders of the tenth century.

And there were also attacks by ships from Muslim North Africa against Europe, what the sources refer to as Saracen pirates. And they plunder Rome in 843, for example. So Europe is certainly in the tenth century faced with yet another wave of invasions. And I think I warned you at the beginning of this course that it was basically about invasions and heresies and that you'd do well if you just concentrated on those things. So we're heresy-free at the moment, but in the tenth century, we certainly have these invasions.

As it happens, they're the last that Western Europe would experience. Not Eastern Europe, because Eastern Europe would be subject to the Mongols who would, for example, score a tremendous victory over the armies of Poland, armies of the Christian king of Hungary as well in the thirteenth century. But this seems to be the end of invasions, the beginning of a period of population increase, better nutrition, better harvests, perhaps explicable to more settled conditions, perhaps explainable by improved climate, perhaps just explainable by human determination and enterprise.

The Christianization of Europe is one of the tremendous phenomena that characterizes our period. And while as a religious movement I have no investment in saying that Christianity is either an advantage or disadvantage, in terms of creating settled, organized polities, the Christianization of places like Scandinavia, Iceland, or Bohemia-- the modern Czech Republic more or less-- or Hungary or Russia, all of which take place in the tenth or early eleventh centuries, all of these Christianizations, conversions bring these polities into a kind of European cultural area, political alliances, trade networks. So Christianization is as much a sign of civilization or at least of a kind of economic development as a thing in itself.

So between 200 and 1000, what are the big differences? Whether these are accomplishments or not is debatable. Certainly the population has declined. Over an 800-year period, the population of Europe is considerably less, not only in towns like Rome, which has gone from something on the order of over 500,000, perhaps as much as a million, to 30,000, maximum. It is a much less Mediterranean-centered world. The sort of geopolitics have changed. The Mediterranean has broken apart into Islamic, Byzantine, and Latin regions.

It is Christian, most of it. Most of Europe apart from Spain is Christian. And this entails all sorts of cultural as well as religious changes. It is also less learned. And the learning that there is is a monopoly of the Church. There is less lay, or secular, learning than there was.

There are some continuities, however. The dominant language of learning and administration remains in 1000, as it was in 200, Latin. Roman culture is still the ideal and still, in effect, the practice, even though it may be adapted to things like churches. But what has been called Romanesque or simply Roman architecture particularly that of the eleventh and early twelfth centuries will indeed be based on Roman principles.

And as we saw with Charlemagne, the idea of Rome, the idea of the Empire is extremely durable. And although Charlemagne's empire is dissolved in the course of the late ninth century, it is at least partially revived in the tenth century under a new dynasty whose first ruler is Otto I, Otto the Great. In 962, he's crowned Roman emperor in Rome by the pope.

His empire does not include the West. So it's not France. It's more Germany than anything else. But this empire would endure until Napoleon, until 1804. In other words for something on the order of 850 years.

So to some extent, what we have accomplished is we have arrived at the point of the emergence of something that can be called Europe other than a geographical term, something that can be called Christendom, not using that in its triumphalist sense but simply as a kind of cultural description of a certain part of the world. And we've reached the point where we can start to talk about the West, this very funny term still used, particularly in popular geopolitical tracts like The West and the Rest, these kinds of statements of the West or the decline of the West. We're at the point of the rise of the West.

And that's where I am going to leave you. Thanks for your participation in this course. Thanks for making this a wonderful semester for me. I hope a lot of fun for you as well. Thanks a lot.

Thank you all so much. It's been fun.
